---
arxiv_id: '2203.02967'
title: Variational Auto-Encoder based Mandarin Speech Cloning
authors:
- Qingyu Xing
- Xiaohan Ma
submitted: '2022-03-06'
categories:
- cs.SD
- eess.AS
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.02967
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 2/36
citations_resolved_at: '2026-07-07T16:35:13+00:00'
references_parsed: 36
arxiv_version: ''
---

# Introduction

Many models have been developed for text-to-speech (TTS) such as WaveNet vocoder and Tacotron synthesizer , which helps to move speech synthesis away from mechanized timbres. And integrated end-to-end TTS systems which only need correspondence labeled between text and audio rather than complex pipelines are already widely used . Not only speech synthesis, but also speech cloning has made great progress in recent years, and it is even possible to synthesize new speech by a few seconds of untranscribed reference audio . But we noted that speech cloning is not as widely used as computer vision related technology now, especially in Chinese, so it could be an important direction to be developed. For example, it can be used for people who have lost voice to communicate naturally and real-time voiceover work in games, greatly reducing the amount of storage space, quickly modifying text messages with less loss.

Based on CV2TTS , we proposed CV2TTS-VAENAR to handle prosodic phrasing and large character set of Mandarin, trying to provide a method for Mandarin speech cloning. In the process that we used the subjective tests to reflect quality of speech synthesis and cloning included MOS and A/B test , and found that they generally didn’t include factors in the application scenario, so the results thus obtained are indeed universal, but inappropriate in some application scenarios. For subjective tests, adding more scenario factors maybe is more conducive to the use of specialization techniques and more effectively reflect the adaptability of real scenarios.

Naturally, regulation was always going to lag behind technological development. Although speaker verification schemes for speech cloning already existed even it was the origin of CV2TTS , and Subramani et al. also proposed efficient representations for the problems. But in the practical application of speech cloning there are currently no relevant industry specification.

# Related work

There were some existing works that applied speech synthesis of various languages which was based on existing models such as Hidden Markov Models (HMM) and Tacotron, and part with our work is similar to them, which appears to be closer to engineering. These works were attempts to generalize the model, and as Chinese is the largest native language in the world , this generalization has a more important meaning. On the basis of speech synthesis, we learned about the idea of speech cloning , and the basic speech cloning model CV2TTS is illustrated in Figure <a href="#fig.model_overview" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig.model_overview">1</a>.

<figure id="fig.model_overview" data-latex-placement="h">

<figcaption>CV2TTS Model overview.</figcaption>
</figure>

The system consists of three independently trained neural networks, which is also the dominant speech cloning scheme:

1.  It proposed a scalable and accurate neural network framework for speaker verification, in which a training task for speaker discrimination yields an embedding that can be used to condition the synthesis network on speaker identity.

2.  It extended the recurrent sequence-to-sequence with attention Tacotron 2 architecture to support multiple speakers following a scheme similar to the method used by Gibiansky et al. .

3.  It used the sample-by-sample autoregressive WaveNet as a vocoder to invert synthesized mel-spectrograms emitted by the synthesis network into time-domain waveforms.

Many papers have been published in which some of the models used in this system have been improved. Weiss et al. proposed a Tacotron-based synthesizer model which uses a fixed intermediate representation, and learns all parameters end-to-end. Its experiments showed that the synthesizer model generates speech with quality approaching a state-of-the-art neural TTS system, with improved generation speed.

In addition to its work on the Tacotron model, FastSpeech & FastSpeech 2/2s are popular synthesizer models because of its non-autoregressive feature. FastSpeech , which represents non-autoregressive TTS in comparison to autoregressive Transformer TTS, can synthesize speech significantly faster and with comparable quality than previous autoregressive models. FastSpeech 2 is the next generation of FastSpeech, which trains the model directly with ground-truth targets rather than the simplified output from the teacher, and introduces more speech variation information (e.g., pitch, energy, and more accurate duration) as conditional inputs, resulting in better results. Indeed, similar work has been published using FastSpeech 2 for Mandarin speech synthesis and cloning, with good results .

However, to generate a hard alignment between the text and the spectrogram, FastSpeech (2) models rely on phoneme-level durations named (Auto-Regressive) AR teacher model which is time-consuming to obtain duration labels. Worse, hard alignment based on phoneme expansion has the potential to degrade the naturalness of synthesized speech. VAE (Variational Auto-Encoder) has been widely used in voice conversion and speech synthesis because of its effectiveness. Our speech cloning system employs the VAENAR-TTS synthesizer model to achieve good result.

# Architecture

To obtain real-time voice cloning, we used the CV2TTS-like architecture whose each of the three components are trained independently:

1.  A recurrent speaker encoder to compute a fixed dimensional vector from a speech .

2.  A extended non-autoregressive sequence-to-sequence synthesizer VAENAR-TTS to predict a mel-spectrogram by speaker embedding vector. Its architecture is shown in Figure <a href="#fig:synthesizermodel_architecture" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:synthesizermodel_architecture">2</a> which can be readily derived with <a href="#equ:vaeformal" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="equ:vaeformal">[equ:vaeformal]</a> formalization .

3.  An non-autoregressive vocoder HiFi-GAN to convert the mel-spectrogram into time domain waveforms .

``` math
\begin{align}
  \log[Pr(Y|X)]\approx &-\int_{Z}{Q(Z|X,Y)\log[\frac{Q(Z|X,Y)}{P(Z|X)}]dZ} \nonumber + \int_{Z}{Q(Z|X,Y)\log[P(Y|Z,X)]dZ}\\
  \label{equ:vaeformal}
\end{align}
```

<figure id="fig:synthesizermodel_architecture" data-latex-placement="h">
<embed src="architecture.pdf" style="width:50.0%" />
<figcaption>Architecture of VAENAR-TTS. The dotted lines are only turned on during the training stage, while their counterparts with the same color are only turned on during the inference phase. The scissors denote that the gradients for the length predictor will not be back-propagated to the text encoder. </figcaption>
</figure>

VAENAR-TTS synthesizer plays a great role in the architecture. Specifically, unlike Glow-based NAR-TTS models that used it as the decoder to predict the spectrogram, the model used Glow to model the prior distribution of the latent variable.

##### Loss Function

We use the standard loss function.

The vocoder training loss function of HiFi-GAN is shown below:
``` math
\begin{align}
  \mathcal{L}_{G} &= \sum_{k=1}^{K}\Bigg[\mathcal{L}_{Adv}(G; D_k) + \lambda_{fm}\mathcal{L}_{FM}(G; D_k)\Bigg] + \lambda_{mel}\mathcal{L}_{Mel}(G)\\
  \mathcal{L}_{D} &= \sum_{k=1}^{K}\mathcal{L}_{Adv}(D_k; G)
  \label{equ:hifigantrainingloss}
\end{align}
```

The synthesizer training loss function of VAENAR-TTS is shown below:
``` math
\begin{align}
  \mathcal{L} = &\mathbf{MSE}(Y, \tilde{Y}) + \alpha \mathbf{D_{KL}}(Q(Z|X,Y)||P(Z|X)) \nonumber\\
  &+ \beta \mathbf{MSE}(\log(L), \log(\tilde{L}))
\label{equ:synthesizertrainingloss}
\end{align}
```

# Experiments

The Experiments part includes training and subjective tests.

## Training

We refer to the code implementation of a voice cloning project named MockingBird and PyTorch implementation of VAENAR-TTS . We follow the official VAENAR-TTS training parameters nearly to train synthesizer model on a NVIDIA Geforce TITAN Xp GPU. In this process, the VAENAR-TTS model has excellent alignment, illustrated in Figure <a href="#fig:audiotimestep" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:audiotimestep">3</a>.

<figure id="fig:audiotimestep" data-latex-placement="h">
<embed src="alignment.pdf" style="width:50.0%" />
<figcaption>Two examples of audio timestep at 70K steps.</figcaption>
</figure>

##### Datasets

The official VAENAR-TTS implementation only used the Databaker Mandarin dataset, which only has female voices. To obtain better synthesis and cloning quality, we train the system on larger datasets, including aidatatang_200zh, magicdata, aishell1 and aishell3 datasets from OpenSLR and our private dataset. The mixed datasets total over 1200 hours.

Our private dataset was created using 48 kHz, 16-bit audio data recorded from Sennheiser MK 4 high-fidelity microphone and re-sampled to 16 kHz, 16-bit WAV format, which is the mainstream technology. The entire audio recording process was filmed by Xiaomi 10 for verification and remediation. In quality checking stage which is general steps of dataset creation:

1.  Economic and time constraints, different from aishell3 , we first use Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) to initially mark the recorded audio, then check and remove utterances with inconsistent raw text and transcription manually.

2.  Text normalization (TN) is carefully applied towards English words, numbers, names, places, streets, organizations, abbreviations, brands and shops, for example:

    - Number: 123 are normalized to yi1 er4 san1.

    - URL: the “www.abc.com”, are normalized to “san1 W dian3 A B C dian3 com”.

    - English abbreviations: VIP, CCTV are presented in uppercase.

3.  utterances containing obvious mis-pronunciations are removed.

4.  Some additional tagging for future work (e.g., scenarios, emotions and overviews).

Private dataset was produced with the consent of the speaker, but unfortunately we cannot make it public in addition to the samples used for experiments due to the agreement.

## Subjective Tests

The original subjective tests claimed that subjects were unaffected by other factors, an ideal situation that is difficult for our team to achieve and difficult to verify that it was achieved . Therefore, we propose a novel subjective test.

The MOS scores are listed in Table <a href="#tab:mos" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:mos">1</a>. The results show that the MOS scores of proposed CV2TTS-VAENAR higher than the other models with excellent RTF. The difference in MOS scores is also confirmed in the A/B test between CV2TTS-VAENAR and CV2TTS in Table <a href="#tab:ab_test" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:ab_test">2</a>.

<div id="tab:mos">

|       Model       | MOS(naturalness & similarity) |            RTF            |
|:-----------------:|:-----------------------------:|:-------------------------:|
|        GT         |       4.66 $`\pm`$ 0.11       |            \-             |
|      CV2TTS       |       2.43 $`\pm`$ 0.11       |   $`1.78\times10^{-1}`$   |
|    CV2TTS-Glow    |       2.53 $`\pm`$ 0.12       |   $`1.26\times10^{-2}`$   |
| **CV2TTS-VAENAR** |     **2.74** $`\pm`$ 0.09     | **$`9.85\times10^{-3}`$** |

The MOS with 95% confidence intervals for the improved system named CV2TTS-VAENAR, ground-truth samples (GT), CV2TTS-Glow and CV2TTS baseline.

</div>

<span id="tab:mos" label="tab:mos"></span>

<div id="tab:ab_test">

|              | **CV2TTS-VAENAR** | CV2TTS |  Same  |
|:------------:|:-----------------:|:------:|:------:|
| Preference % |    **64.375**     | 15.625 | 20.000 |

Results of preference test between CV2TTS-VAENAR and CV2TTS on speaker. The evaluation is at *p* \<0.01 level.

</div>

<span id="tab:ab_test" label="tab:ab_test"></span>

##### Experimental Setup

We adapt the traditional subjective test environment to combine it with practical applications to better reflect quality of speech synthesis and cloning . This subjective test contains twenty sentences which were not included in the training data with a variety of scenarios in Table <a href="#tab:sampleoverview" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:sampleoverview">3</a>.

<div id="tab:sampleoverview">

|       Scenarios        |              Overviews               | Number |
|:----------------------:|:------------------------------------:|:------:|
|  Daily Conversations   | Dating, Current Affairs and Memories |   4    |
|     News Broadcast     |       Earthquake and Epidemic        |   2    |
|    Public Broadcast    |   Lost & Found and Train Terminus    |   2    |
| Human Customer Service |         Welcome and Response         |   2    |
|      Phrase Read       |             Book Quotes              |   2    |
|     Game Voiceover     |      Genshin Impact Copywriting      |   2    |
|      Guided Tour       |   Kong Mansion and Forbidden City    |   2    |
|    Faculty Teaching    |      Marxism and Linear Algebra      |   2    |
|        Whisper         |              Comforting              |   2    |

Scenarios, overviews and number of sample sentences

</div>

<span id="tab:sampleoverview" label="tab:sampleoverview"></span>

We evaluate our proposed approach on speech cloning by training three models on the Datasets paragraph described above. They all use the state of the art GAN-based vocoder HiFi-GAN whose implementation is public for a fair comparison.

The synthetic speech’s naturalness and similarity were assessed using the MOS test and the A/B test. The test included 16 native listeners, and the speech samples were shuffled in each test.

The real-time factor (RTF), which is the time it takes to synthesize one second of speech spectrogram from text, is used to determine synthesis speed. The RTF benchmarks are run on a single NVIDIA Geforce TITAN Xp GPU with a single batch size which averaged over 10 times runs on the entire test set for each model.

# Conclusions and Discussions

We present a VAENAR-TTS-based Mandarin speech cloning system similar to CV2TTS, which demonstrates the feasibility of porting the alignment learning synthesizer model to speech cloning system. Testing results show that compared to Tacotron-based CV2TTS, CV2TTS-VAENAR has higher naturalness, similarity and real-time performance in Mandarin speech cloning as demonstrated Figure <a href="#tab:mos" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:mos">1</a> <a href="#tab:ab_test" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:ab_test">2</a>. Our innovations in subjective test which introduce scenarios of the test are theoretically valid to Multi-Scenario applications and can be further investigated.

Here we propose a idea for daily conversations benchmark test refered to the traditional The Turing Test . We are unable to implement this test now, but we guess it will work. It is related to The Total Turing Test proposed by Harnad who considered that a better test than The Turing Test will be one that requires responses to all of our inputs. Construct a robot with something like human sensorimotor capabilities is not the scope of our study for this paper and we don’t even care if participant is a computer (e.g., English GPT-3 and Chinese CPM-2 )or a human. However, we can explore the correlation of the results of the test with different TTS methods to confirm the advantage of a certain method in practical applications.

We notice that PAMA-TTS is another model of alignment learning which applies monotonic constraint rather than leverages both annealing reduction factor and causality mask to help attention-based alignment learning so we are curious if it will work better in the field of speech cloning. Although we achieve better speech cloning quality, the expression of tone and is essential in the field of voiceover and in communication. And incorporating expressiveness into speech synthesis systems makes listeners more enjoyable to listen to and interact with has been proven . Akuzawa et al. proposed a method for combining VoiceLoop and VAE into the speech synthesis architecture resulting in higher quality speech, may be applied to the next step in the development of Mandarin synthesis.

Furthermore, with the development of AI accelerators for mobile devices, real-time speech cloning with autoregressive models may be possible, resulting in better results. Finally we demand that industry regulations and legislation on speech synthesis and cloning be improved and this aspect should be discussed by legal experts to promote the healthy development of the whole industry.

# Acknowledgements

All of the work for this paper was done outside of school hours and even during Chinese New Year. We are both studying at Yanzhou No.1 Senior High School and would like to thank the school teachers for our support in basic education, especially Ma Xincun and Zhao Yongjun.

Even though all of the "innovations" are obvious in the paper, doing the majority of the work in the speech cloning process by ourselves, which included Computer Science, Sound, Engineering, Broadcasting, and even Psychology at a time when interdisciplinary research is becoming mainstream, is rare and meaningful. Every computer scientist has aspired to be cross-disciplinary experts like Alan Mathison Turing and John von Neumann, and we are no exception. If at all possible, we will work in that direction from now on.

<div class="appendix">

# Subjective tests screenshots

<figure id="fig:ABTESTGUI" data-latex-placement="h">
<embed src="AB-TEST.pdf" style="width:90.0%" />
<figcaption>Graphical User Interface (GUI) of subjective test system, reflecting our design philosophy for scenarios.</figcaption>
</figure>

# Formula Definition

## HiFi-GAN

``` math
\begin{align}
  \mathcal{L}_{Adv}(D; G) &= \mathbb{E}_{(x, s)} \Bigg[(D(x)-1)^2 + (D(G(s)))^2\Bigg]\\
  \mathcal{L}_{Adv}(G; D) &= \mathbb{E}_{s} \Bigg[(D(G(s))-1)^2\Bigg]\\
  \mathcal{L}_{Mel}(G) &= \mathbb{E}_{(x, s)} \Bigg[||\phi(x)-\phi(G(s))||_{1}\Bigg]\\
  \mathcal{L}_{FM}(G; D) &= \mathbb{E}_{(x, s)} \Bigg[\sum_{i=1}^{T}\frac{1}{N_{i}}||D^i(x)-D^i(G(s))||_{1}\Bigg]\\
  \mathcal{L}_{G} &= \mathcal{L}_{Adv}(G; D) + \lambda_{fm}\mathcal{L}_{FM}(G; D) + \lambda_{mel}\mathcal{L}_{Mel}(G)\\
  \mathcal{L}_{D} &= \mathcal{L}_{Adv}(D; G)
\end{align}
```

## VAENAR-TTS

``` math
\begin{align}
  P(Y|Z,X)=\prod_{i=1}^{N}{P(y_i|Z,X)}
\end{align}
```

</div>

[^1]: Xing proposed using VAENAR-TTS in CV2TTS, worked on implementing the idea, and experimented with novel subjective tests.

[^2]: Ma organized participation in new dataset and as a consultant for the broadcast program.

## References

1. Akuzawa, K., Iwasawa, Y., and Matsuo, Y. (2018).
\newblock Expressive speech synthesis via modeling expressions with variational
  autoencoder.
\newblock {\em Proc. Interspeech 2018}, pages 3067--3071.
2. babysor and Jemine, C. (2021).
\newblock Mockingbird.
\newblock \url{https://github.com/babysor/MockingBird}.
3. Cong, J., Yang, S., Xie, L., and Su, D. (2021).
\newblock Glow-wavegan: Learning speech representations from gan-based
  variational auto-encoder for high fidelity flow-based speech synthesis.
\newblock {\em ArXiv}, abs/2106.10831.
4. Eberhard, David~M., G. F.~S. and (eds.), C. D.~F. (2021).
\newblock Ethnologue: Languages of the world. twenty-fourth edition.
5. Floridi, L. and Chiriatti, M. (2020).
\newblock Gpt-3: Its nature, scope, limits, and consequences.
\newblock {\em Minds and Machines}, 30(4):681--694.
6. Gibiansky, A., Arik, S., Diamos, G., Miller, J., Peng, K., Ping, W., Raiman,
  J., and Zhou, Y. (2017).
\newblock Deep voice 2: Multi-speaker neural text-to-speech.
\newblock {\em Advances in neural information processing systems}, 30.
7. Harnad, S. (1989).
\newblock Minds, machines and searle.
\newblock {\em Journal of Experimental \& Theoretical Artificial Intelligence},
  1(1):5--25.
8. Harnad, S. (1991).
\newblock Other bodies, other minds: A machine incarnation of an old
  philosophical problem.
\newblock {\em Minds and Machines}, 1(1):43--54.
9. He, Y., Luan, J., and Wang, Y. (2021).
\newblock Pama-tts: Progression-aware monotonic attention for stable seq2seq
  tts with accurate phoneme duration control.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04486}. [arXiv:2110.04486](https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.04486)
10. Henter, G.~E., Lorenzo-Trueba, J., Wang, X., and Yamagishi, J. (2017).
\newblock Principles for learning controllable tts from annotated and latent
  variation.
\newblock In {\em INTERSPEECH}, pages 3956--3960.
11. Hirst, D., Rilliard, A., and Auberg{\'e}, V. (1998).
\newblock Comparison of subjective evaluation and an objective evaluation
  metric for prosody in text-to-speech synthesis.
\newblock In {\em The Third ESCA/COCOSDA Workshop (ETRW) on Speech Synthesis}.
12. Ho, T.~V. and Akagi, M. (2021).
\newblock Cross-lingual voice conversion with controllable speaker
  individuality using variational autoencoder and star generative adversarial
  network.
\newblock {\em IEEE Access}, 9:47503--47515.
13. Hui, B., Jiayu, D., Xingyu, N., Bengu, W., and Zheng, H. (2017).
\newblock Aishell-1: An open-source mandarin speech corpus and a speech
  recognition baseline.
\newblock In {\em Oriental COCOSDA 2017}, page Submitted.
14. Jia, Y., Zhang, Y., Weiss, R.~J., Wang, Q., Shen, J., Ren, F., Chen, Z.,
  Nguyen, P., Pang, R., Moreno, I.~L., and Wu, Y. (2018).
\newblock Transfer learning from speaker verification to multispeaker
  text-to-speech synthesis.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems}, NIPS'18, page 4485–4495, Red Hook, NY,
  USA. Curran Associates Inc.
15. Jones, D., Alford, D., Bridges, A., Tremblay, S., and Macken, B. (1999).
\newblock Organizational factors in selective attention: The interplay of
  acoustic distinctiveness and auditory streaming in the irrelevant sound
  effect.
\newblock {\em Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
  Cognition}, 25(2):464.
16. Karabetsos, S., Tsiakoulis, P., Chalamandaris, A., and Raptis, S. (2008).
\newblock Hmm-based speech synthesis for the greek language.
\newblock In {\em International Conference on Text, Speech and Dialogue}, pages
  349--356. Springer.
17. Kim, J., Kim, S., Kong, J., and Yoon, S. (2020).
\newblock Glow-tts: A generative flow for text-to-speech via monotonic
  alignment search.
\newblock {\em Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems},
  33:8067--8077.
18. Kingma, D.~P. and Dhariwal, P. (2018).
\newblock Glow: Generative flow with invertible 1x1 convolutions.
\newblock {\em Advances in neural information processing systems}, 31.
19. Kong, J., Kim, J., and Bae, J. (2020).
\newblock Hifi-gan: Generative adversarial networks for efficient and high
  fidelity speech synthesis.
20. Krstulovic, S., Hunecke, A., and Schr{\"o}der, M. (2007).
\newblock An hmm-based speech synthesis system applied to german and its
  adaptation to a limited set of expressive football announcements.
\newblock In {\em INTERSPEECH}, pages 1897--1900. Citeseer.
21. Lee, K. (2021).
\newblock Vaenar-tts.
\newblock \url{https://github.com/keonlee9420/VAENAR-TTS}.
22. Lu, H., Wu, Z., Wu, X., Li, X., Kang, S., Liu, X., and Meng, H. (2021).
\newblock Vaenar-tts: Variational auto-encoder based non-autoregressive
  text-to-speech synthesis.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03298}. [arXiv:2107.03298](../2021/2107.03298.md)
23. Oppy, G. and Dowe, D. (2003).
\newblock The turing test.
24. Ren, Y., Hu, C., Tan, X., Qin, T., Zhao, S., Zhao, Z., and Liu, T.-Y. (2021).
\newblock Fastspeech 2: Fast and high-quality end-to-end text to speech.
25. Ren, Y., Ruan, Y., Tan, X., Qin, T., Zhao, S., Zhao, Z., and Liu, T.-Y. (2019).
\newblock Fastspeech: Fast, robust and controllable text to speech.
\newblock In Wallach, H., Larochelle, H., Beygelzimer, A., d\textquotesingle
  Alch\'{e}-Buc, F., Fox, E., and Garnett, R., editors, {\em Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems}, volume~32. Curran Associates, Inc.
26. Shen, J., Pang, R., Weiss, R.~J., Schuster, M., Jaitly, N., Yang, Z., Chen, Z.,
  Zhang, Y., Wang, Y., Skerrv-Ryan, R., et~al. (2018).
\newblock Natural tts synthesis by conditioning wavenet on mel spectrogram
  predictions.
\newblock In {\em 2018 IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech and
  signal processing (ICASSP)}, pages 4779--4783. IEEE.
27. Shi, Y., Bu, H., Xu, X., Zhang, S., and Li, M. (2021).
\newblock Aishell-3: A multi-speaker mandarin tts corpus.
\newblock {\em Proc. Interspeech 2021}, pages 2756--2760.
28. Subramani, N. and Rao, D. (2020).
\newblock Learning efficient representations for fake speech detection.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence}, volume~34, pages 5859--5866.
29. Van Den~Oord, A., Dieleman, S., Zen, H., Simonyan, K., Vinyals, O., Graves, A.,
  Kalchbrenner, N., Senior, A.~W., and Kavukcuoglu, K. (2016).
\newblock Wavenet: A generative model for raw audio.
\newblock {\em SSW}, 125:2.
30. Viswanathan, M. and Viswanathan, M. (2005).
\newblock Measuring speech quality for text-to-speech systems: development and
  assessment of a modified mean opinion score (mos) scale.
\newblock {\em Computer Speech \& Language}, 19(1):55--83.
31. Wan, L., Wang, Q., Papir, A., and Lopez-Moreno, I. (2018).
\newblock Generalized end-to-end loss for speaker verification.
\newblock {\em 2018 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
  Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 4879--4883.
32. Wang, Y., Skerry-Ryan, R.~J., Stanton, D., Wu, Y., Weiss, R.~J., Jaitly, N.,
  Yang, Z., Xiao, Y., Chen, Z., Bengio, S., Le, Q.~V., Agiomyrgiannakis, Y.,
  Clark, R. A.~J., and Saurous, R.~A. (2017).
\newblock Tacotron: Towards end-to-end speech synthesis.
\newblock In {\em INTERSPEECH}.
33. Weiss, R.~J., Skerry-Ryan, R., Battenberg, E., Mariooryad, S., and Kingma,
  D.~P. (2021).
\newblock Wave-tacotron: Spectrogram-free end-to-end text-to-speech synthesis.
\newblock In {\em ICASSP 2021 - 2021 IEEE International Conference on
  Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 5679--5683.
34. Zen, H., Nose, T., Yamagishi, J., Sako, S., Masuko, T., Black, A.~W., and
  Tokuda, K. (2007).
\newblock The hmm-based speech synthesis system (hts) version 2.0.
\newblock In {\em SSW}, pages 294--299. Citeseer.
35. Zhang, C., Cai, Y., and Rao, W. (2021a).
\newblock A non-autoregressivee network for chinese text to speech and voice
  cloning.
\newblock In {\em 2021 IEEE International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Computer Applications (ICAICA)}, pages 96--101.
36. Zhang, Z., Gu, Y., Han, X., Chen, S., Xiao, C., Sun, Z., Yao, Y., Qi, F., Guan,
  J., Ke, P., et~al. (2021b).
\newblock Cpm-2: Large-scale cost-effective pre-trained language models.
\newblock {\em AI Open}, 2:216--224.
