---
arxiv_id: '2205.06421'
title: Talking Face Generation with Multilingual TTS
authors:
- Hyoung-Kyu Song
- Sang Hoon Woo
- Junhyeok Lee
- Seungmin Yang
- Hyunjae Cho
- Youseong Lee
- Dongho Choi
- Kang-wook Kim
submitted: '2022-05-13'
categories:
- cs.CV
- cs.AI
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.06421
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 3/21
citations_resolved_at: '2026-07-07T16:33:36+00:00'
references_parsed: 21
arxiv_version: ''
---

# Face Generation with Multilingual TTS

## Overall Architecture

The proposed system consists of three main modules: a preprocessor module, a multilingual TTS module, and a talking face generation module. First, the preprocessor module transforms the input text to a phoneme sequence. The multilingual TTS module, in turn, generates a raw speech waveform based on the phoneme sequence with the designated speaker identity. Subsequently, the talking face generation module synthesizes the final output video with the lip movement synchronized to the input speech.

## Preprocessor

While the details of the preprocessing step differ for each language, the common objective is to convert raw text into a sequence of phonemes. The preprocessor first cleans the text by removing any character or symbol that does not belong to the specified language. Then the text goes through a normalization procedure, converting non-verbal texts, , digits, dates, and short forms of words, to their verbalized forms. Finally, the preprocessor maps all graphemes in the text to phonemes. We use different phoneme sets for each language in our setup; the phoneme sets for Korean, English, Japanese, and Chinese are Hangul, ARPAbet, Hiragana, and Pinyin, respectively. For Korean and English, we utilize our in-house grapheme-to-phoneme algorithms. For Japanese and Chinese grapheme-to-phoneme conversion, we use open source libraries SudachiPy[^1] and pypinyin[^2]. The preprocessor may employ an optional language translation system for downstream applications like a neural dubber.

## Multilingual TTS

We use multi-speaker VITS as the base model for the multilingual TTS module. To enable multilingual speech synthesis for VITS, we add embeddings for each language and input them to submodules. Our preliminary experiments showed that injecting the language embedding to the text encoder and the duration predictor yields the best result. We will refer to this setting as the multilingual VITS.

## Talking Face Generation

For talking face generation, we use our internal talking face generation model with output image resolution of $`512 \times 512`$. Our face generation model comprises three components: an image encoder, an audio encoder, and a decoder. The image encoder and the audio encoder extract features from the input image and the audio, respectively. We concatenate the extracted features from both encoders and feed them to the decoder, which then generates lip-synchronized face images. All three components of our module are primarily CNN-based models. The audio encoder that employs additional RNN layers to maintain temporal consistency. Thus, our module can generate image sequences with minimal autoregressive computation, reducing the network latency.

## Dataset Collection

For the training data of our target identity, we record two hours of footage of the target speaker speaking in Korean. The recorded video and audio data are resampled to 25 and 22050 Hz, respectively.

We only use the facial regions from the image frames as the input to the talking face generation model. To extract the facial region from a image region, we first estimate facial landmarks with a pre-trained model provided by . A prior study cropped the facial regions tightly around the detected faces. However, we find that if the entire head is not included in the cropped region, the final output image contains borderline discontinuity. To mitigate this issue, we expand the facial regions to include the entire head with extra margins.

For the multilingual VITS training data, we use a mix of our internal datasets and open source datasets, in addition to the target speech data. Our internal datasets comprise 28 hours of Korean speech from 25 speakers and 13 hours of English speech from 13 speakers. We also include several open source text-to-speech datasets as a part of our train set: the Korean Single Speaker Speech dataset for Korean, the LJ Speech dataset and the LibriTTS dataset for English, the Voice Actress corpus[^3], the JSUT dataset , and the JVS dataset for Japanese, and the AISHELL-3 dataset for Chinese. Overall, our train set includes speech from 472 speakers totaling 206 hours.

## Training Details

The training procedure for the multilingual VITS remains largely the same as the original VITS training . We employ a couple of techniques on top of the original VITS training to improve the quality of multilingual speech synthesis. First, we apply domain adversarial training to minimize the speaker information leakage to the encoded text representations. Following Zhang , we add a speaker classifier with a gradient reversal layer after the text encoder. For the classification loss scale factor $`\lambda`$, we follow the schedule from .

During the initial experiments, we observed that feeding the speaker embedding directly to the duration predictor degrades the quality of the output speech. We hypothesize that the unseen combination of language embedding and speaker embedding introduces instability.

To resolve this issue, we add a regularization term to the loss, such that the mean of all speaker embeddings are pushed towards the zero vector. During inference, if the speaker’s original language does not match the input language, we use the zero vector in place of the speaker embedding, similarly to the use of the zero vector as the residual encoding in Zhang .

In training our talking face generation model, we follow Prajwal and use masked ground truth frames and negative frames, , frames from different part of the video. In addition, we apply various augmentations, , translation, rotation, zoom in/out to the facial region, instead of normalizing the facial regions to minimize the spatial variance. This drives the generator to be more robust to the rotation of the neck or the size ratio of the face to the image when generating the face. We also adopt adversarial training with multi-scale discriminator as the auxiliary training to improve the perceptual visual quality.

[^1]: <https://github.com/WorksApplications/SudachiPy>

[^2]: <https://github.com/mozillazg/python-pinyin>

[^3]: <http://voice-statistics.github.io/>

## References

1. Nanxin Chen, Yu Zhang, Heiga Zen, Ron~J. Weiss, Mohammad Norouzi, Najim Dehak,
  and William Chan.
\newblock {WaveGrad 2: Iterative Refinement for Text-to-Speech Synthesis}.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the Interspeech}, pages 3765--3769, 2021.
2. Joon~Son Chung and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock {Out of time: automated lip sync in the wild}.
\newblock In {\em Asian Conference on Computer Vision}, pages 251--263.
  Springer, 2016.
3. Yaroslav Ganin, Evgeniya Ustinova, Hana Ajakan, Pascal Germain, Hugo
  Larochelle, Fran\c{c}ois Laviolette, Mario Marchand, and Victor Lempitsky.
\newblock {Domain-Adversarial Training of Neural Networks}.
\newblock {\em Journal of Machine Learning Research}, 17(1):2096–2030, 2016.
4. Jianzhu Guo, Xiangyu Zhu, Yang Yang, Fan Yang, Zhen Lei, and Stan~Z Li.
\newblock {Towards Fast, Accurate and Stable 3D Dense Face Alignment}.
\newblock In {\em European Conference on Computer Vision}, pages 152--168.
  Springer, 2020.
5. Keith Ito and Linda Johnson.
\newblock {The LJ Speech Dataset}.
\newblock \url{https://keithito.com/LJ-Speech-Dataset/}, 2017.
6. Jaehyeon Kim, Jungil Kong, and Juhee Son.
\newblock {Conditional Variational Autoencoder with Adversarial Learning for
  End-to-End Text-to-Speech}.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
  Learning}, pages 5530--5540. PMLR, 2021.
7. Jungil Kong, Jaehyeon Kim, and Jaekyoung Bae.
\newblock {HiFi-GAN: Generative Adversarial Networks for Efficient and High
  Fidelity Speech Synthesis}.
\newblock {\em Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems}, 33, 2020.
8. Avisek Lahiri, Vivek Kwatra, Christian Frueh, John Lewis, and Chris Bregler.
\newblock {LipSync3D: Data-Efficient Learning of Personalized 3D Talking Faces
  from Video using Pose and Lighting Normalization}.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 2755--2764, 2021.
9. Soumi Maiti, Erik Marchi, and Alistair Conkie.
\newblock {Generating Multilingual Voices Using Speaker Space Translation Based
  on Bilingual Speaker Data}.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
  Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 7624--7628, 2020.
10. Kyubyong Park.
\newblock {KSS Dataset: Korean Single speaker Speech Dataset}.
\newblock
  \url{https://www.kaggle.com/bryanpark/korean-single-speaker-speech-dataset}.
11. KR Prajwal, Rudrabha Mukhopadhyay, Vinay~P Namboodiri, and CV Jawahar.
\newblock {A Lip Sync Expert Is All You Need for Speech to Lip Generation In
  the Wild}.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on
  Multimedia}, pages 484--492, 2020.
12. Ryan Prenger, Rafael Valle, and Bryan Catanzaro.
\newblock {Waveglow: A Flow-based Generative Network for Speech Synthesis}.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
  Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 3617--3621, 2019.
13. Yi Ren, Chenxu Hu, Xu Tan, Tao Qin, Sheng Zhao, Zhou Zhao, and Tie-Yan Liu.
\newblock {FastSpeech 2: Fast and High-Quality End-to-End Text to Speech}.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
  Representations}, 2021.
14. Jonathan Shen, Ruoming Pang, Ron~J. Weiss, Mike Schuster, Navdeep Jaitly,
  Zongheng Yang, Zhifeng Chen, Yu Zhang, Yuxuan Wang, Rj Skerrv-Ryan, Rif~A.
  Saurous, Yannis Agiomvrgiannakis, and Yonghui Wu.
\newblock {Natural TTS Synthesis by Conditioning Wavenet on Mel Spectrogram
  Predictions}.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
  Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 4779--4783, 2018.
15. Yao Shi, Hui Bu, Xin Xu, Shaoji Zhang, and Ming Li.
\newblock {AISHELL-3: A Multi-Speaker Mandarin TTS Corpus}.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the Interspeech}, pages 2756--2760, 2021.
16. Ryosuke Sonobe, Shinnosuke Takamichi, and Hiroshi Saruwatari.
\newblock {JSUT corpus: free large-scale Japanese speech corpus for end-to-end
  speech synthesis}.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.00354}, 2017. [arXiv:1711.00354](../2017/1711.00354.md)
17. Shinnosuke Takamichi, Kentaro Mitsui, Yuki Saito, Tomoki Koriyama, Naoko Tanji,
  and Hiroshi Saruwatari.
\newblock {JVS corpus: free Japanese multi-speaker voice corpus}.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.06248}, 2019. [arXiv:1908.06248](../2019/1908.06248.md)
18. Konstantinos Vougioukas, Stavros Petridis, and Maja Pantic.
\newblock {End-to-End Speech-Driven Realistic Facial Animation with Temporal
  GANs}.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.09313}, 2018. [arXiv:1805.09313](https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.09313)
19. Ting-Chun Wang, Ming-Yu Liu, Jun-Yan Zhu, Andrew Tao, Jan Kautz, and Bryan
  Catanzaro.
\newblock {High-Resolution Image Synthesis and Semantic Manipulation with
  Conditional GANs}.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, 2018.
20. H. Zen, V. Dang, R. Clark, Y. Zhang, R.~J. Weiss, Y. Jia, Z. Chen, and Y. Wu.
\newblock {LibriTTS: A Corpus Derived from LibriSpeech for Text-to-Speech}.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the Interspeech}, 2019.
21. Yu Zhang, Ron~J. Weiss, Heiga Zen, Yonghui Wu, Zhifeng Chen, R.J. Skerry-Ryan,
  Ye Jia, Andrew Rosenberg, and Bhuvana Ramabhadran.
\newblock {Learning to Speak Fluently in a Foreign Language: Multilingual
  Speech Synthesis and Cross-Language Voice Cloning}.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the Interspeech}, pages 2080--2084, 2019.
