---
arxiv_id: "2401.02839"
title: "Pheme: Efficient and Conversational Speech Generation"
authors:
  - Paweł Budzianowski
  - Taras Sereda
  - Tomasz Cichy
  - Ivan Vulić
submitted: "2024-01-05"
categories:
  - eess.AS
  - cs.AI
  - cs.CL
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.02839
source: arxiv-html
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 0/0
citations_resolved_at: "2026-07-07T16:18:35+00:00"
references_parsed: 0
arxiv_version: ""
---

# Pheme: Efficient and Conversational Speech Generation

Paweł Budzianowski, Taras Sereda, Tomasz Cichy, Ivan Vulić\
PolyAI Limited\
London, United Kingdom\
{pawel,ivan}@poly-ai.com

###### Abstract

In recent years, speech generation has seen remarkable progress, now achieving one-shot generation capability that is often virtually indistinguishable from real human voice. Integrating such advancements in speech generation with large language models might revolutionize a wide range of applications. However, certain applications, such as assistive conversational systems, require natural and conversational speech generation tools that also operate efficiently in real time. Current state-of-the-art models like VALL-E and SoundStorm, powered by hierarchical neural audio codecs, require large neural components and extensive training data to work well. In contrast, MQTTS aims to build more compact conversational TTS models while capitalizing on smaller-scale real-life conversational speech data. However, its autoregressive nature yields high inference latency and thus limits its real-time usage. In order to mitigate the current limitations of the state-of-the-art TTS models while capitalizing on their strengths, in this work we introduce the Pheme model series that 1) offers compact yet high-performing models, 2) allows for parallel speech generation of 3) natural conversational speech, and 4) it can be trained efficiently on smaller-scale conversational data, cutting data demands by more than 10x but still matching the quality of the autoregressive TTS models. We also show that through simple teacher-student distillation we can meet significant improvements in voice quality for single-speaker setups on top of pretrained Pheme checkpoints, relying solely on synthetic speech generated by much larger teacher models. Audio samples and pretrained models are available online.

## 1 Introduction

A crucial requirement for wider adoption of many modern AI applications, and especially conversational systems such as voice assistants, is the ability to synthesise natural, human-level or ‘lifelike’ speech (Latif et al., 2023; Xue et al., 2023). Owing to the use of deep learning architectures, neural text-to-speech (TTS) synthesis has seen some tremendous improvements (Kim et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2023; Kharitonov et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023; Li et al., 2022), and the pace of development has been further accelerated recently. In particular, the progress has been unlocked by casting speech processing from a continuous to a discrete domain via neural audio codecs (Défossez et al., 2022; Zeghidour et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023b; a; Zhu et al., 2023): this enables the use of standard and powerful Transformer-based sequence-to-sequence modeling paradigms (Vaswani et al., 2017; Raffel et al., 2020), established in the work on large language models, for audio generation. Such Transformer-based architectures have been successfully applied to text-to-speech synthesis (Borsos et al., 2023a; Wang et al., 2023; Kharitonov et al., 2023; Borsos et al., 2023b; Zhang et al., 2023), as well as to music generation (Agostinelli et al., 2023) and generation of other audio signals (Kreuk et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023b).

Conversational TTS is ‘condition sine qua non’ of the lifelike user experience that would increase the overall satisfaction of users interacting with assistive conversational systems. However, the majority of current work on Transformer-based TTS still trains and evaluates models in controlled ‘upper bound’ environments that rely on cleanly recorded reading (e.g., audiobooks) or acted speech. Such environments effectively ignore the undeniable fact that human speech acts across many scenarios are conversational in nature, and that the TTS systems must be highly adaptable to applications across many different domains and should also be useful ‘in the wild’ (e.g., over the phone). Moreover, conversational TTS synthesis poses additional challenges as conversational speech conveys additional paralinguistic information (e.g., emotions, pitch), and is much richer in terms of prosodic variations and expressiveness (Zhang et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2022; Xue et al., 2023).

Another key practical imperative is the efficiency of the TTS systems (Miao et al., 2021), where efficiency covers the following pivotal aspects. First, parameter efficiency requires the TTS models to be compact and thus shareable and runnable on consumer hardware. Second, data efficiency requires the models to learn high-quality and competitive models for particular scenarios and voices even with limited amounts of in-domain or in-voice data (or even in ‘zero-shot’ or ‘one-shot’ prompting setups). In addition, smaller-scale pretraining data would enable quicker development cycles. Finally, inference efficiency (with low latency) makes the models production-friendly and usable in ‘real-life’ applications (e.g., as a component of conversational assistants speaking over the phone).

In this work, we first take stock of the current progress in Transformer-based neural TTS models (see later in §2): we start by detecting the limitations of the current models and then, inspired by the previous work, adopt and adapt their desirable properties and features during the construction of our efficient and conversational Transformer-based TTS system: PolyAI’s Pheme.¹¹1In Greek mythology, Pheme is the goddess and personified spirit of, among others, fame and rumor and is described as ‘she who initiates and furthers communication’. Moreover, the word Pheme is related to the Greek word $`\phi`$\acctonosαναι meaning ‘to speak’. The main goal of Pheme is to maintain high-quality TTS both in multi-speaker and single-speakers scenarios, while simultaneously providing the following features: 1) synthesis of rich-in-prosody and naturally sounding speech rather than acted and artificial speech; 2) compact, shareable and easily fine-tunable models which also work with unseen voices through one-shot prompting; 3) reduced pretraining time and data requirements; 4) high inference efficiency and low latency. Further, as another contribution, we propose and empirically validate that further gains in single-speaker specialization scenarios could be achieved via leveraging synthetic data created by much larger models or 3rd-party software.

Our experiments assess all the key properties of Pheme such as speech intelligibility, naturalness and diversity, as well as inference efficiency. The main comparison with the previous state-of-the-art conversational TTS model, MQTTS (Chen et al., 2023a),²²2MQTTS also showed improved performance on conversational TTS in comparison to some non-autoregressive TTS models such as VITS (Kim et al., 2021), and is in spirit closest to our work. reveal that Pheme offers improved intelligibility and naturalness at the same or even reduced model size, while dramatically increasing inference speed via incorporating non-autoregressive parallel decoding, and this way providing true ‘real-time’ synthesis capabilities. Owing to this plus its design simplicity, Pheme might serve as a solid framework for further developments in conversational and efficient TTS, and in hope to guide such developments we release our code and pretrained models online at [https://polyai-ldn.github.io/pheme/](https://polyai-ldn.github.io/pheme/).

## 2 Related Work and Background

This work builds upon a recent stream of research on the so-called Transformer-based large audio models, where the key idea is to apply large language models (LLMs) in the field of audio processing and generation. For a broader overview, we refer the reader to a recent comprehensive survey (Latif et al., 2023), while here we briefly survey prior work related to conversational and efficient TTS, and key modeling choices for Pheme.

Discrete Speech Representations: Semantic and Acoustic Tokens. Neural audio codecs (Défossez et al., 2022; Zeghidour et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023b; Zhang et al., 2023, among others) provide the capability of reconstructing high-quality audio at very low bitrates, which in turn enables speech modeling in the discrete domain (e.g., through standard sequence-to-sequence LLM-style paradigms). Prior work typically divides the discrete speech representations into two core groups: 1) semantic tokens and 2) acoustic tokens. This duality aims to disentangle the content related to pure semantics (which should be fully captured by semantic tokens) from the paralinguistic content (e.g., speaker identity, prosody, timbre) which should be captured by acoustic tokens. Ideally, the full disentaglement would enable fully separate development of the two core system components: 1) text-to-semantics (T2S) aiming to learn to generate the layer of semantic tokens and 2) acoustics-to-speech (A2S) which learns to generate speech output from the generated acoustic tokens which were conditioned on the (previously generated) semantic tokens. This particular design is at the heart of the most recent models such as SpearTTS (Kharitonov et al., 2023), MQTTS (Chen et al., 2023a), SoundStorm (Borsos et al., 2023b), and USLM (Zhang et al., 2023), and we thus also adopt this disentanglement into T2S and A2S modeling in this work.

Residual Vector Quantization for TTS. While there are some technical differences between different TTS architectures related to how semantic and acoustic tokens are constructed, on a high level the majority of recent work relies on the concept of residual vector quantisation (RVQ).³³3For a nice and didactic overview, we refer the reader to the following write-up: [https://drscotthawley.github.io/blog/posts/2023-06-12-RVQ.html](https://drscotthawley.github.io/blog/posts/2023-06-12-RVQ.html). Here, each compressed audio frame gets quantized by multiple hierarchical layers of quantizers, where each subsequent layer works with the residual of the previous layer. For instance, SoundStorm borrows a hierarchical sequence-to-sequence approach of AudioLM (Borsos et al., 2023a) where semantic tokens are used as an intermediate conditioning signal to generate acoustic tokens from the SoundStream codec (Zeghidour et al., 2022). Other models that use RVQ include VALL-E (Wang et al., 2023), RVQGAN (Kumar et al., 2023), NaturalSpeech 2 (Shen et al., 2023), MQTTS Chen et al. (2023a), among others.

However, the work of Zhang et al. (2023) has empirically validated that the disentanglement desiderata between semantic and acoustic information in respective semantic and acoustic tokens are often not fully met (i.e., there are undesirable residuals of semantic information in higher quantization layers). They have thus proposed a unified SpeechTokenizer RVQ method which creates $`Q`$ quantization layers, where the first layer is treated as the layer of semantic tokens, while all the other $`Q - 1`$ layers are treated as hierarchical layers of acoustic tokens. SpeechTokenizer shows a higher rate of disentanglement than some other standard choices which is why we use this as our go-to model to derive RVQ-based semantic and acoustic tokens. We discuss this in more detail in §3.

Conversational TTS. As mentioned before, the majority of prior TTS work has focused on reading or acted speech environments and datasets such as LibriSpeech (Panayotov et al., 2015) or VCTK.⁴⁴4[https://datashare.ed.ac.uk/handle/10283/3443](https://datashare.ed.ac.uk/handle/10283/3443) VALL-E trains on a much larger LibriLight dataset (Kahn et al., 2020) covering 60k hours of speech coupled with transcriptions generated by an automatic speech recognition (ASR) system. Concerning truly conversational TTS, SoundStorm (Borsos et al., 2023b) trains a dialogue synthesis model on a cleaned and publicly unavailable corpus of approximately 100,000 hours of dialogue.

In this work, following the relevant prior work on conversational TTS, MQTTS, we adopt and use the GigaSpeech corpus Chen et al. (2021), which in its largest, ‘XL’ variant covers 10k hours of noisy speech. Similar to LibriLight, GigaSpeech is also an ‘ASR-ed, silver transcriptions’ corpus which spans transcribed audio from audiobooks, podcasts, and YouTube with a 16 kHz sampling rate. This effectively creates a noisy conversational dataset, where noise might come from imperfect speech transcriptions as well as from the actual speech sources with occasionally ill-defined speech. Our primary goal is to demonstrate that it is possible to pretrain good-quality conversational TTS models even with such noisy data (or at least after filtering noise from the data, see later in §4) which is more than 10x smaller than what SoundStorm has been trained on, and more than 6x smaller than the audiobooks-only pretraining dataset used by VALL-E.

Efficient TTS. Next, in order to satisfy the efficiency criteria, we rely on the following findings from prior work. First, the real-time usage of the current state-of-the-art conversational TTS model, MQTTS, is limited by its autoregressive nature. In order to boost efficiency, we instead adopt the recently proposed masking (non-autoregressive) parallel decoding scheme of MaskGIT (Chang et al., 2022), further adapted to speech token sequences produced by RVQ in the work of Borsos et al. (2023b). In a nutshell, MaskGIT starts from masked tokens and then, across multiple iterations, predicts a portion of the tokens based on their confidence scores, where the portion typically increases during the iterative procedure progression. Technical details of MaskGIT-style decoding for Pheme are discussed in §4, and in §5 we show that the parallel decoding scheme does not compromise generation quality even when applied with very compact models such as Pheme while offering huge boosts in inference speed.

Regarding parameter efficiency, our T2S and A2S components remain modest in size, again following the MQTTS design principle. For instance, we limit the T2S component (see later in §3) to a standard T5-style (Raffel et al., 2020) sequence-to-sequence model with a maximum of 50M or 100M parameters. Further details on Pheme model size are covered in §3 and §4. In comparison, SpearTTS uses by an order of magnitude larger T5-style T2S model (500M+ parameters) while SoundStorm relies on a ByT5-Large model (Xue et al., 2022) for T2S: there, solely the T2S component already stretches to 1.23B parameters, which makes the model very cumbersome in production. Similarly, regarding data efficiency, for their T2S component SpearTTS relies on very expensive unsupervised pretraining plus additional 60k hours of LibriLight data with an additional back-translation step; SoundStorm learns the T2S component using the curated corpus of 100k hours of spoken dialogue. Here, we aim to learn the T2S component again relying solely on supervised training (without any time-consuming pretraining and back-translation) on much smaller datasets, as discussed before.

Finally, as another efficiency aspect, following the rich body of work on distillation for speech models (Huang et al., 2023a; Peng et al., 2023), we investigate if efficient and high-quality specialized single-speaker models can be obtained (i.e., fine-tuned) from pretrained Pheme checkpoints, relying solely on modest amounts (e.g., 10h or less) of synthetic speech from larger TTS models.

## 3 Methodology

In what follows, we now delve deeper into the main components of Pheme, covering 1) speech tokenization, 2) learning of the T2S component and 3) parallel non-autoregressive decoding for the A2S component, showcasing its simple and efficient design.

Speech Tokenization. As the source of semantic and acoustic tokens, we rely on the recent SpeechTokenizer model (Zhang et al., 2023).⁵⁵5[https://github.com/ZhangXInFD/SpeechTokenizer](https://github.com/ZhangXInFD/SpeechTokenizer) It operates on a single-channel audio signal represented as a sequence $`x \in {\mathbb{R}}^{T}`$, where $`T`$ denotes the length of the input sequence, $`T = {d \cdot r_{s}}`$, where $`d`$ denotes duration and $`r_{s}`$ is the sampling rate (e.g., 16 kHz in GigaSpeech). For simplicity, we use the available off-the-shelf variant of the SpeechTokenizer which was pretrained on LibriSpeech, without any additional adaptive fine-tuning on GigaSpeech. The full implementation and training details of SpeechTokenizer are available in the original work.

SpeechTokenizer, unlike other RVQ-based speech tokenization methods, unifies semantic and acoustic tokens, aiming to better disentangle different aspects of speech information hierarchically across the corresponding RVQ layers.⁶⁶6The importance of this disentanglement was also evidenced in our preliminary experiments. Besides SpeechTokenizer, we (i) investigated the standard approach of using $`C`$ k-means centroids of the embeddings extracted from layers 7 or 9 of the HuBERT model (Hsu et al., 2021) as the layer of semantic tokens, coupled with RVQ-based acoustic tokens obtained by DAC (Kumar et al., 2023; Garcia et al., 2023) and EnCodec (Défossez et al., 2022). In order to match the sampling rates between the two heterogeneous sources of semantic and acoustic tokens, we either duplicated neighboring semantic tokens or stretched audio we supplied as input to the HuBERT model. Regardless of the chosen model combination or alignment strategy, the preliminary experiments revealed much weaker, subpar performance when compared to the finally selected variant based on SpeechTokenizer. The final output comprises $`Q = 8`$ hierarchical RVQ layers $`q_{1},\ldots,q_{8}`$ with the codebook size of $`C = {1,024}`$ in each RVQ layer, that is, it is a matrix $`{\{ 1,\ldots,C\}}^{Q \times T}`$. The row/layer $`q_{1}`$ is taken as the layer of semantic tokens (for learning the T2S component and conditioning the A2S component), and the remaining RVQ layers $`q_{2}`$-$`q_{8}`$ are treated as hierarchical acoustic tokens.

T2S: Training and Inference. The first critical functionality for TTS is learning the mapping (or rather a sequence-to-sequence ‘translation’) from the input raw text to the representation in the layer of semantic tokens: the output of the T2S component in practice is a $`T`$-dimensional vector of integers sampled (with repetition) from the $`|C|`$-item set $`\{ 1,\ldots,C\}`$. We treat T2S as the standard sequence-to-sequence problem and train a T5-style encoder-decoder architecture from scratch.

The raw text $`t_{r}`$ is first preprocessed into the sequence of IPA phones relying on the standard IPA phonemizer: $`t_{ipa} = {\text{IPA}{(t_{r})}}`$, where $`\text{IPA}{()}`$ denotes the phonemization function.⁷⁷7We use [https://github.com/bootphon/phonemizer](https://github.com/bootphon/phonemizer). The T5 model architecture is initialized from scratch with random weights and a specialised vocabulary of 1,119 items in total. The vocabulary comprises the 1,024 different codes (i.e., integers from 1 to 1024) from the codebook of SpeechTokenizer, plus all the phones from the IPA phonemizer, plus the special tokens for begin-of-sequence and end-of-sequence.

In the basic form, the T5 model learns the following T2S function: $`s_{t} = {\text{T2S}{(t_{ipa})}}`$, where $`s_{t}`$ is the resulting vector of semantic tokens for the target text. The ground truth semantic tokens are obtained by applying SpeechTokenizer directly on training data allowing for duplicated tokens. This is the format we use during training.

At inference, we can additionally prompt the Pheme model by providing the speech prompt $`x_{p}`$ along with its text transcription $`t_{p}`$: we run the prompt through SpeechTokenizer to obtain its semantic tokens $`s_{p}`$ (i.e., $`q_{1}`$ output from the tokenizer) and 7 levels of acoustic tokens (denoted as $`a_{p,1},\ldots,a_{p,7}`$, which correspond to RVQ output layers $`q_{2}`$-$`q_{8}`$ from the tokenizer). At inference, we then provide the concatenation of \[$`t_{{ipa},p}`$,$`t_{{ipa},t}`$\] as the full input to the T2S component, where $`t_{{ipa},p}`$ is the IPA-based representation of $`t_{p}`$ and $`t_{{ipa},t}`$ is the IPA-based representation of the target text for which we want to generate speech. When generating semantic tokens, we then also directly provide $`s_{p}`$ as the incomplete, first part of the full output, and let the model generate the rest of the output sequence, that is, $`s_{t}`$ - the sequence of semantic tokens for the target text.

We acknowledge that this approach to T2S is only one plausible option among other potential variants, such as the ones that preprocess input text data into CMU-based sequences of phonemes (Kharitonov et al., 2023) or apply byte-level models directly on raw text $`t_{r}`$ (Borsos et al., 2023b); we leave other variants for future exploration.

A2S: Training and Inference. We adopt the non-autoregressive procedure of SoundStorm, which is in turn an extension of masking and confidence-based parallel decoding scheme of MaskGIT (Chang et al., 2022). The RVQ-based SpeechTokenizer by default provides the coarse-to-fine order of the RVQ hierarchy, which is a crucial requirement. As discussed by Borsos et al. (2023b), this means that 1) the conditional dependencies between different RVQ levels are taken into account during training and inference, and 2) sampling of finer levels, given all the tokens from coarser levels, can be conducted in parallel without loss of quality: they are responsible to capturing very local and fine-grained acoustic details, typically independent of each other. We further extend the SoundStorm method via the use of SpeechTokenizer-obtained acoustic tokens, and via the introduction of speaker embeddings in the pipeline. A brief description is provided in what follows, and we refer the reader to prior work (Chang et al., 2022; Borsos et al., 2023b) for further technical details.

Masking. First, a time step $`t \in {\{ 1,\ldots,{T - 1}\}}`$ is sampled uniformly at random, acting as the prompt delimiter. We do not mask any tokens before the prompt delimiter, effectively preparing the model for the ‘voice prompting’ setup at inference. Furthermore, we never mask the so-called conditioning tokens comprising the full level of semantic tokens ($`q_{1}`$ from SpeechTokenizer at training or obtained via the T2S component at inference). Furthermore, we propose to use speaker embeddings at all $`T`$ time steps as additional conditioning tokens: they are obtained via a state-of-the-art speaker diarization model pyannote (Plaquet & Bredin, 2023).⁸⁸8[https://github.com/pyannote/pyannote-audio](https://github.com/pyannote/pyannote-audio) The idea is that the direct use of speaker embeddings would yield higher generation fidelity than letting the model use the speaker information only implicitly.

Next, the current RVQ level $`q_{c}`$ is sampled uniformly at random from the set $`\{ q_{2},\ldots,q_{8}\}`$. Following that, the binary $`T`$-dimensional mask $`M`$ is sampled according to a cosine schedule for the current level $`q_{c}`$. More formally, the masking probability is $`p = {cos{(u)}}`$ where $`u`$ is uniformly sampled from the interval $`\lbrack 0,{\pi/2}\rbrack`$, and $`M_{i}`$ is then sampled from the Bernoulli distribution with the probability $`p`$. Following that, we mask the selected non-prompt tokens at $`q_{c}`$ for which it holds: (i) they appear at a time step $`t_{m}`$ where $`t_{m} > t`$, (ii) $`M_{t_{m}} = 1`$. Finally, we mask all non-prompt tokens at finer RVQ levels, that is, it holds that (i) they appear at a time step $`t_{m} > t`$ and (ii) their associated level $`q > q_{c}`$.

Training. After obtaining the masked token sequence, the A2S model is trained via the standard cross-entropy loss, where the loss is calculated on the masked tokens of the level $`q_{c}`$ (and not on tokens from levels $`q > q_{c}`$). The A2S model is a standard Conformer network with bidirectional self-attention (Gulati et al., 2020) and rotary positional embeddings (Su et al., 2021).

Decoding. Given the conditioning tokens and (non-mandatory) prompt tokens, the iterative parallel decoding scheme is exactly the same as with SoundStorm: it proceeds RVQ level-wise, moving to the next RVQ level $`q + 1`$ only after all the tokens from all the previous levels $`1,\ldots,q`$ have been sampled. Within each RVQ level, we rely on the confidence-based sampling regime of (Chang et al., 2022). In summary, this level-wise iterative and parallel procedure substantially decreases the number of required forward passes in comparison to fully autoregressive models such as MQTTS; see again (Borsos et al., 2023b) for other technical details.

This design with speaker embeddings then allows both for 1) one-shot speech generation: we provide both the short prompt with or without the speaker embedding to the model at inference; 2) zero-shot generation: we do not supply the prompt but provide the speaker embedding to the A2S component.

## 4 Experimental Setup

Model Configurations. We train Pheme in two different sizes, labeled small and large. First, the 100M parameter model (with $`\sim`$45M parameters allocated to the T2S component, and $`\sim`$55M allocated to the A2S component) serves to run fair comparisons against the relevant prior work, MQTTS, where both models are trained solely on filtered conversational data from GigaSpeech (see §4.1). Second, the 300M model ($`\sim`$100M + $`\sim`$200M) aims to measure how well Pheme can scale with more parameters and data provided (including non-conversational data), and how its increase in size impacts its inference efficiency. The detailed model parameters are provided in Appendix A.1.

### 4.1 Training and Inference Setups

Training Data. For training the smaller, 100M Pheme variant, we use a filtered and preprocessed version of GigaSpeech (Chen et al., 2021), where we remove a large number of ill-defined and extremely noisy speech, following prior work (Chen et al., 2023a). In particular, we keep only utterances from podcasts and YouTube portions of GigaSpeech XL, with estimated signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR) $`>`$20 dB and with duration between 5 and 15 seconds. After the filtering step, we resample all utterances to 16 kHz and normalize loudness to -20 dB. For the SNR estimation we use WADA-SNR⁹⁹9[https://gist.github.com/johnmeade/d8d2c67b87cda95cd253f55c21387e75](https://gist.github.com/johnmeade/d8d2c67b87cda95cd253f55c21387e75) and for loudness normalization we use pyloudnorm¹⁰¹⁰10[https://github.com/csteinmetz1/pyloudnorm](https://github.com/csteinmetz1/pyloudnorm). The final preprocessed and filtered GigaSpeech dataset contains a total of only 550 hours of speech.

For training the larger, 300M Pheme variant, we combine 1) the aforementioned 550 hours of preprocessed GigaSpeech with 2) the full LibriTTS dataset (Zen et al., 2019) (585 hours, 24 kHz) and a randomly subsampled 25% of the English portion of Multilingual LibriSpeech (MLS) (Pratap et al., 2020) ($`\sim`$10,000 hours, 24 kHz). All the data points were downsampled to 16 kHz. SpeechTokenizer has a temporal downsampling factor of 320, that is, for an input waveform sampled at 16 kHz it will produce quantized representations at 50 Hz.

For the single-speaker setup with synthetic data where we start from the pretrained multi-speaker 300M Pheme model, we select one voice from a well-known proprietary TTS provider¹¹¹¹11Not disclosed for confidentiality. which was used in a real production system, and then set aside 270 generated utterances from real conversations (a total duration of 17 minutes) for evaluation, while the remaining synthetic utterances are used for training: there are two versions of training data spanning 7 hours and 10 hours of speech. The same preprocessing and filtering steps as with LibriTTS and MLS have been applied, including resampling to 16 kHz.

Training Setup. For both T2S and A2S components, we use $`10,000`$ warmup steps, learning rate is set to $`5`$e$`- 4`$, and we rely on the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019) with $`\beta_{1} = 0.9`$ and $`\beta_{2} = 0.98`$. The learning rate is linearly decayed from $`2 \times 10^{- 4}`$ to $`0`$. For non-GigaSpeech utterances, we cut off the duration of each data point to 30 seconds. In both cases, training was carried out for $`800`$k steps with $`8`$ A10 GPUs in bf16 precision.

Inference Setup. For the T2S component, we run multinomial sampling with temperature set to $`0.7`$ and $`top\_ k`$ set to $`210`$. For A2S, we perform greedy sampling in the first level of acoustic tokens ($`q_{2}`$) and apply 16 steps of confidence-based sampling for all the remaining levels.¹²¹²12The hyperparameters were obtained via grid search over the following candidate values: temperature over the set $`\lbrack 0.3,0.7,1.0\rbrack`$, $`top\_ k`$ over $`\lbrack 60,120,150,210\rbrack`$ and inference steps for A2S over the set $`\lbrack 1,4,8,16,25\rbrack`$. We performed inference on the validation set for all the possible hyperparameter combinations and selected the combination which minimized WER (see §4.2 on the details of how WER is computed).

### 4.2 Evaluation Setup and Metrics

We evaluate Pheme across four key dimensions of any multi-speaker (conversational) TTS system: 1) speech intelligibility, 2) voice preservation, 3) reconstruction error measuring proximity to the reference ground truth speech, and 4) prosody diversity and naturalness. Further, 5) we assess inference efficiency reflecting the usability of the model in ‘real-time’ production scenarios. The actual metrics per each evaluation dimension are described in what follows.

Evaluation Data. Since we care about conversational aspects of the model, we designed a particular evaluation set where each data point consists of two consecutive utterances pronounced by the same speaker: the first utterance always serves as the prompt both for T2S and A2S components of the model (see §3). To create this evaluation dataset we measure the cosine similarity of the speaker embeddings extracted from consecutive utterances of the GigaSpeech development split. We retain only pairs of consecutive utterances where their cosine similarity is greater than 0.5. The final dataset comprises 227 (prompt, target) pairs used for model evaluation.

Speech Intelligibility: ASR Word Error Rate (WER). Following prior work (Hayashi et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2023a), in order to assess synthesised speech intelligibility we rely on Word Error Rate (WER) obtained by a state-of-the-art ASR system, Whisper¹³¹³13[https://github.com/openai/whisper](https://github.com/openai/whisper) large-v2. We convert text to lowercase and remove punctuation.

Voice Preservation: Speaker Similarity Score (SSS). Since Pheme is a multi-speaker model, we assess to what extent distinct speaker characteristics are preserved in synthesised speech, reporting the standard SSS scores. For measuring speaker similarity we employ WavLM (Chen et al., 2022), a state-of-the-art self-supervised model according to the SUPERB benchmark (Tsai et al., 2022).¹⁴¹⁴14[https://superbbenchmark.org](https://superbbenchmark.org) We use released model parameters and supplementary scripts¹⁵¹⁵15[https://github.com/microsoft/UniSpeech](https://github.com/microsoft/UniSpeech) for measuring speaker similarity. This consists of extracting features from the WavLM backbone model for both ground-truth and synthetic waveforms and measuring pairwise cosine similarity in the latent space.

Reconstruction Error: Mel-cepstral Distortion (MCD). This metric, also established in prior work (Hayashi et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2023a), computes the reconstruction error between the ground truth speech and synthesis, with the fixed text and speaker. To time-align ground-truth and synthesized utterances we use dynamic time warping (Müller, 2007) and compute mean Euclidean distance between MEL-cepstral coefficients of the corresponding time-aligned audio frames. This measure characterizes distortion of acoustic information and is widely used to roughly evaluate speech quality, because it correlates well with human perception (Kubichek, 1993).

Prosody Diversity and Naturalness: Fréchet Inception Distance (FID). We again follow prior work (Chen et al., 2023a) for measuring prosody diversity and naturalness, reporting the FID scores (Heusel et al., 2017). FID is an established objective metric in the evaluation of text-to-image generation models, originally created to measure realism and diversity of generated images, but its formalism makes it amenable also to a wider spectrum of generative models including the speech-oriented ones. More formally, it calculates the 2-Wasserstein distance between the collections of real/true speech segments and the corresponding synthesized/fake distributions, aiming to capture naturalness and diversity of the synthesised collection. This computation, of course, implies the use of a sufficiently large speech collection such as GigaSpeech used in our work. We use an open-source implementation of FID ¹⁶¹⁶16[https://github.com/mseitzer/pytorch-fid](https://github.com/mseitzer/pytorch-fid) score for our measurements following the MQTTS evaluation setup.

Efficiency: Real-Time Factor (RTF). It is a standard metric of measuring the speed (or latency) of an audio processing (or any other processing) system. If we define $`f{(t_{s})}`$ as the time required to process the input speech $`s`$ of duration $`t_{s}`$, RTF is computed as $`{f{(t_{s})}}/t_{s}`$. Put simply, as a hardware-dependent metric, RTF tells how many seconds of speech are generated in one second of wall time. We used A10 and A100 NVIDIA GPUs for hardware tests.

For the short sentence tests we used the following sentence: ‘Regrettably, we can’t accommodate pets.’, which is expected to last less than 3 seconds in a casual conversation. For the long sentence test, the following one is used: ‘Regrettably, we can’t accommodate pets. However, we do permit assistance animals, provided they adhere to ADA regulations. For instance, if you’re making arrangements for a stay at The Blue Finch Hotel in Naples, Italy, kindly ensure your service animal complies with this.’ This sentence should take more than 10 seconds to utter in a casual conversation.

## 5 Results and Discussion

Pheme versus MQTTS. We first aim to establish whether switching to fast parallel decoding hurts overall quality of conversational TTS synthesis. In this experiment, we compare the small Pheme variant (100M parameters) against the same-sized MQTTS model (as a state-of-the-art conversational TTS model) trained on the same GigaSpeech corpus (550 hours of preprocessed and filtered data, see §4.1). The main results are summarized in Table 1. They reveal that, despite having much quicker, non-autoregressive inference, Pheme outperforms mqtts on WER and MCD. As expected, while both models have reasonably high WER scores due to noisy and modestly sized training data (only 550 hours of training speech data in total), we note that Pheme is able to produce more diverse and more intelligible speech (offering reductions in WER of almost 2 points and higher FID scores). While slightly lower than those of MQTTS, speaker similarity scores still display high fidelity rates with production-ready potential.

| Model                                | WER $`\downarrow`$ | SSS $`\uparrow`$ | MCD $`\downarrow`$ | FID $`\downarrow`$ |
| ------------------------------------ | ------------------ | ---------------- | ------------------ | ------------------ |
| mqtts (100M)                         | 14.2               | 0.682            | 9.568              | 19.690             |
| Pheme-small (100M)                   | 12.4               | 0.594            | 8.838              | 20.349             |
| \hdashlinePheme-small (100M), w/o SE | 16.3               | 0.492            | 8.893              | 20.608             |
| Pheme-large (300M)                   | 11.9               | 0.549            | 8.671              | 19.675             |

Table 1: Comparison of Pheme and mqtts with GigaSpeech training and test data (see §4.1). ‘w/o SE’ is an ablation that does not use speaker embeddings for conditioning in the A2S component (§3). We also show the results of the Pheme-large model for completeness (bottom row), but the reader should be aware that it cannot be directly compared to the other models as it was trained on a much larger (and different) training set (see §4.1 again).

| Model              | short | long  |
| ------------------ | ----- | ----- |
| mqtts (100M)       | 1.930 | 1.842 |
| Pheme-small (100M) | 0.133 | 0.133 |
| Pheme-large (300M) | 0.143 | 0.143 |

Table 2: Inference speed (RTFs, lower is better) on a single A100 GPU for two inference cases: short and long sentences (see §4). Very similar RTFs with similar trends are obtained on an A10 GPU.

Delving deeper into model failures, we observe that a significant portion of errors (in terms of WER) stems from the misspellings of proper nouns and homonyms. This suggests that using an ASR model with language model-assisted decoding can further reduce WER by favoring output sequences that contain out-of-distribution words such as proper nouns.

Table 1 also shows the scores of the 300M Pheme variant on the GigaSpeech test data, showcasing slight gains over the 100M variant in WER, MCD, and FID scores, but the reader should be aware that the 300M variant uses more abundant training data (beyond only preprocessed GigaSpeech) than mqtts and Pheme-small.

Inference Efficiency. After establishing the relative synthesis quality, we investigate the efficiency aspect. Inference speed (RTF) for mqtts and Pheme is provided in Table 2. Coupled with the results from Table 1, these results suggest huge benefits in terms of efficiency via non-autoregressive decoding, without compromising the generation quality: for instance, while a speech utterance of $`\sim`$10 seconds would require 18.4 seconds to process with MQTTS, which is infeasible in production, the 300M Pheme model requires only $`\sim`$1.4 seconds of processing time (a $`14.5 \times`$ speed-up). Even a sentence with a duration of 3 seconds requires almost 6 seconds of processing with MQTTS, while the processing time is only 0.4 seconds with Pheme. The scores further reveal that the RTF scores with Pheme are not impacted at all by the expected output duration. Even more importantly, the reported RTFs indicate that the 3x larger model maintains almost the same and very competitive ‘production-friendly’ inference speed while offering substantially higher quality synthesis. In sum, Pheme is able to maintain all the desirable qualities of MQTTS (i.e., conversational nature, parameter efficiency, sample efficiency) while simultaneously offering the ability to easily scale the model and increase its overall synthesis quality while maintaining unmatched inference speed.

| Fine-tuning \[hours\] | WER $`\downarrow`$ | SSS $`\uparrow`$ | MCD $`\downarrow`$ | FID $`\downarrow`$ |
| --------------------- | ------------------ | ---------------- | ------------------ | ------------------ |
| 0                     | 3.9                | 0.533            | 24.799             | 6.314              |
| \hdashline7           | 4.7                | 0.578            | 31.426             | 5.653              |
| 10                    | 4.5                | 0.576            | 33.251             | 5.677              |

Table 3: Single voice quality with different amounts of artificial data for single-speaker fine-tuning, starting from the Pheme-large (300M) multi-speaker checkpoint (first row of the table).

Single-Speaker Specialization. Next, we take the Pheme-large (300M) multi-speaker model and evaluate it in a production scenario where the goal is to create a single ‘brand voice’, a specialised TTS model that can output high-quality conversational TTS relying on a single speaker. We train the 300M variant on 7h and 10h of synthetic speech uttered in the same voice (see §4). The results are provided in Table 3. First, we note that even the multi-speaker 300M Pheme without any specialization exhibits very strong performance with low WER rates. Further fine-tuning on synthetic data yields slight losses in WER scores, but it offers gains in speaker similarity and FID scores, showing that the Pheme checkpoint can get fine-tuned even with synthetic data to better capture the single ‘brand voice’. If the goal is single-speaker specialization of a multi-speaker model checkpoint, we expect that further improvements might be achieved by (i) providing real human (instead of synthetic) training data uttered in the target voice, and (ii) scaling up training data: this warrants further investigation.

| Fine-tuning \[hours\] | WER $`\downarrow`$ | SSS $`\uparrow`$ | MCD $`\downarrow`$ | FID $`\downarrow`$ |
| --------------------- | ------------------ | ---------------- | ------------------ | ------------------ |
| 0                     | 4.7                | 0.445            | 28.761             | 6.436              |
| \hdashline7           | 4.1                | 0.502            | 34.703             | 5.813              |
| 10                    | 4.5                | 0.504            | 33.020             | 5.829              |

Table 4: Ablation: A2S without speaker embeddings. Single voice quality with different amounts of artificial data for single-speaker fine-tuning, starting from the Pheme-large (300M) multi-speaker checkpoint (first row of the table); cf. Table 3 for the results with the full Pheme model.

Ablation: A2S without Speaker Embeddings. We also analyze the importance of including speaker embeddings in A2S training through an ablation. As revealed both in GigaSpeech experiments (Table 1) and in single-speaker specialization experiments (compare the results in Tables 3 and 4), the use of speaker embeddings has substantial positive impact on final performance, especially in terms of achieved fidelity (captured through the SSS scores). In the GigaSpeech evaluation, inclusion of speaker embeddings in fact positively affects all the evaluation metrics.

On T2S and A2S. We also analyzed Pheme through the lens of its two pivotal components: T2S and A2S. Our findings suggest that T2S is in fact the bottleneck of the entire system. While the A2S component typically performs robustly (modulo hyperparameter tuning) even in low-parameter setups (even lower than the 55M component used in Pheme 100M), further scaling down the T2S component yields learning instability and much deteriorated generation quality. Furthermore, with parallel decoding in A2S, the T2S component is now the main efficiency bottleneck: T2S processing consumes roughly 90% of the total TTS processing time. This also means that relying on highly parameterized, large models (even with $`\geq`$ 1B parameters) for T2S as typically used in prior work (Kharitonov et al., 2023; Borsos et al., 2023b) is unsustainable for real-time production systems. This preliminary analysis suggests that future work should pay more attention to further enhancements of the T2S component, aiming to provide a better trade-off between performance and efficiency of T2S.

## 6 Conclusion and Future Work

We introduced Pheme TTS models, with the goal of creating and steering high-quality and production-friendly TTS systems that are conversational and highly parameter-, data-, and inference-efficient. To this end, we systematized and then adapted and extended recent advancements in Transformer-based TTS models, showing that it is possible to build a highly efficient TTS model that is up to almost 15x quicker at inference than previous state-of-the-art conversational TTS model (Chen et al., 2023a) while maintaining or even improving speech generation quality. We also showed that multi-speaker Pheme models can be effectively scaled up and specialised for particular voices via distillation with synthetic training data.

We hope that the models shared with the community will serve as a solid departure and reference point for further developments of conversational and product-oriented TTS systems, aiming to focus on the interplay and trade-off between synthesis quality and efficiency. However, we have only scratched the surface of possibilities in this work. As indicated before, future work might look into other architectures and further improvements of the bottleneck text-to-semantics (T2S) component or could explore other parallel and efficient decoding strategies for TTS, e.g., speculative decoding (Leviathan et al., 2023). Another avenue of future research might target the use of established parameter-efficient and modular designs (Pfeiffer et al., 2023) for quicker and more efficient adaptation, or work on multilingual TTS (Pratap et al., 2023), or on synthesis of very long utterances. Finally, our work indicated that there is still a large gap in high-quality conversational TTS data, so future research should also put more focus on such data collection and curation.

## 7 Acknowledgements

We would like to thank our colleagues at PolyAI for many fruitful discussions and for their help with evaluation. We are also grateful to Michael Chen at PolyAI for the introduction and to Amazon Web Services for the computation donation which allowed us to run large-scale experiments.

## References

- Agostinelli et al. (2023) Andrea Agostinelli, Timo I. Denk, Zalán Borsos, Jesse H. Engel, Mauro Verzetti, Antoine Caillon, Qingqing Huang, Aren Jansen, Adam Roberts, Marco Tagliasacchi, Matthew Sharifi, Neil Zeghidour, and Christian Havnø Frank. Musiclm: Generating music from text. _CoRR_, abs/2301.11325, 2023. URL [https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2301.11325](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2301.11325).
- Borsos et al. (2023a) Zalán Borsos, Raphaël Marinier, Damien Vincent, Eugene Kharitonov, Olivier Pietquin, Matthew Sharifi, Dominik Roblek, Olivier Teboul, David Grangier, Marco Tagliasacchi, and Neil Zeghidour. AudioLM: A language modeling approach to audio generation. _IEEE ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language Processing_, 31:2523–2533, 2023a. URL [https://doi.org/10.1109/TASLP.2023.3288409](https://doi.org/10.1109/TASLP.2023.3288409).
- Borsos et al. (2023b) Zalán Borsos, Matthew Sharifi, Damien Vincent, Eugene Kharitonov, Neil Zeghidour, and Marco Tagliasacchi. SoundStorm: Efficient parallel audio generation. _CoRR_, abs/2305.09636, 2023b. doi: [10.48550/ARXIV.2305.09636](10.48550/ARXIV.2305.09636). URL [https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.09636](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.09636).
- Chang et al. (2022) Huiwen Chang, Han Zhang, Lu Jiang, Ce Liu, and William T. Freeman. MaskGIT: Masked generative image transformer. In _IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, June 18-24, 2022_, pp.  11305–11315. IEEE, 2022. URL [https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.01103](https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.01103).
- Chen et al. (2021) Guoguo Chen, Shuzhou Chai, Guan-Bo Wang, Jiayu Du, Wei-Qiang Zhang, Chao Weng, Dan Su, Daniel Povey, Jan Trmal, Junbo Zhang, Mingjie Jin, Sanjeev Khudanpur, Shinji Watanabe, Shuaijiang Zhao, Wei Zou, Xiangang Li, Xuchen Yao, Yongqing Wang, Zhao You, and Zhiyong Yan. GigaSpeech: An evolving, multi-domain ASR corpus with 10, 000 hours of transcribed audio. In _Interspeech 2021, 22nd Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication Association, Brno, Czechia, 30 August - 3 September 2021_, pp.  3670–3674. ISCA, 2021. URL [https://doi.org/10.21437/Interspeech.2021-1965](https://doi.org/10.21437/Interspeech.2021-1965).
- Chen et al. (2023a) Li-Wei Chen, Shinji Watanabe, and Alexander Rudnicky. A vector quantized approach for text to speech synthesis on real-world spontaneous speech. In _Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2023, Thirty-Fifth Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence, IAAI 2023, Thirteenth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2023, Washington, DC, USA, February 7-14, 2023_, pp.  12644–12652. AAAI Press, 2023a. URL [https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v37i11.26488](https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v37i11.26488).
- Chen et al. (2022) Sanyuan Chen, Chengyi Wang, Zhengyang Chen, Yu Wu, Shujie Liu, Zhuo Chen, Jinyu Li, Naoyuki Kanda, Takuya Yoshioka, Xiong Xiao, Jian Wu, Long Zhou, Shuo Ren, Yanmin Qian, Yao Qian, Jian Wu, Michael Zeng, Xiangzhan Yu, and Furu Wei. WavLM: Large-scale self-supervised pre-training for full stack speech processing. _IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing_, 16(6):1505–1518, 2022. URL [https://doi.org/10.1109/JSTSP.2022.3188113](https://doi.org/10.1109/JSTSP.2022.3188113).
- Chen et al. (2023b) Sanyuan Chen, Yu Wu, Chengyi Wang, Shujie Liu, Daniel Tompkins, Zhuo Chen, Wanxiang Che, Xiangzhan Yu, and Furu Wei. BEATs: Audio pre-training with acoustic tokenizers. In _International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2023, 23-29 July 2023, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA_, volume 202 of _Proceedings of Machine Learning Research_, pp.  5178–5193. PMLR, 2023b. URL [https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/chen23ag.html](https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/chen23ag.html).
- Défossez et al. (2022) Alexandre Défossez, Jade Copet, Gabriel Synnaeve, and Yossi Adi. High fidelity neural audio compression. _CoRR_, abs/2210.13438, 2022. doi: [10.48550/ARXIV.2210.13438](10.48550/ARXIV.2210.13438). URL [https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2210.13438](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2210.13438).
- Garcia et al. (2023) Hugo Flores Garcia, Prem Seetharaman, Rithesh Kumar, and Bryan Pardo. VampNet: Music generation via masked acoustic token modeling. _CoRR_, abs/2307.04686, 2023. URL [https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2307.04686](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2307.04686).
- Gulati et al. (2020) Anmol Gulati, James Qin, Chung-Cheng Chiu, Niki Parmar, Yu Zhang, Jiahui Yu, Wei Han, Shibo Wang, Zhengdong Zhang, Yonghui Wu, and Ruoming Pang. Conformer: Convolution-augmented transformer for speech recognition. In Helen Meng, Bo Xu, and Thomas Fang Zheng (eds.), _Interspeech 2020, 21st Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication Association, Virtual Event, Shanghai, China, 25-29 October 2020_, pp.  5036–5040. ISCA, 2020. URL [https://doi.org/10.21437/Interspeech.2020-3015](https://doi.org/10.21437/Interspeech.2020-3015).
- Hayashi et al. (2020) Tomoki Hayashi, Ryuichi Yamamoto, Katsuki Inoue, Takenori Yoshimura, Shinji Watanabe, Tomoki Toda, Kazuya Takeda, Yu Zhang, and Xu Tan. Espnet-TTS: Unified, reproducible, and integratable open source end-to-end text-to-speech toolkit. In _2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, ICASSP 2020, Barcelona, Spain, May 4-8, 2020_, pp.  7654–7658. IEEE, 2020. URL [https://doi.org/10.1109/ICASSP40776.2020.9053512](https://doi.org/10.1109/ICASSP40776.2020.9053512).
- Heusel et al. (2017) Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter. Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. In Isabelle Guyon, Ulrike von Luxburg, Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Rob Fergus, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, and Roman Garnett (eds.), _Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA_, pp.  6626–6637, 2017.
- Hsu et al. (2021) Wei-Ning Hsu, Benjamin Bolte, Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai, Kushal Lakhotia, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Abdelrahman Mohamed. HuBERT: Self-supervised speech representation learning by masked prediction of hidden units. _IEEE ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language Processing_, 29:3451–3460, 2021. URL [https://doi.org/10.1109/TASLP.2021.3122291](https://doi.org/10.1109/TASLP.2021.3122291).
- Huang et al. (2023a) Kuan-Po Huang, Tzu-hsun Feng, Yu-Kuan Fu, Tsu-Yuan Hsu, Po-Chieh Yen, Wei-Cheng Tseng, Kai-Wei Chang, and Hung-Yi Lee. Ensemble knowledge distillation of self-supervised speech models. In _IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing ICASSP 2023, Rhodes Island, Greece, June 4-10, 2023_, pp.  1–5. IEEE, 2023a. URL [https://doi.org/10.1109/ICASSP49357.2023.10096445](https://doi.org/10.1109/ICASSP49357.2023.10096445).
- Huang et al. (2023b) Rongjie Huang, Mingze Li, Dongchao Yang, Jiatong Shi, Xuankai Chang, Zhenhui Ye, Yuning Wu, Zhiqing Hong, Jiawei Huang, Jinglin Liu, Yi Ren, Zhou Zhao, and Shinji Watanabe. Audiogpt: Understanding and generating speech, music, sound, and talking head. _CoRR_, abs/2304.12995, 2023b. URL [https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.12995](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.12995).
- Kahn et al. (2020) Jacob Kahn, Morgane Rivière, Weiyi Zheng, Evgeny Kharitonov, Qiantong Xu, Pierre-Emmanuel Mazaré, Julien Karadayi, Vitaliy Liptchinsky, Ronan Collobert, Christian Fuegen, Tatiana Likhomanenko, Gabriel Synnaeve, Armand Joulin, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Emmanuel Dupoux. Libri-Light: A benchmark for ASR with limited or no supervision. In _2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, ICASSP 2020, Barcelona, Spain, May 4-8, 2020_, pp.  7669–7673. IEEE, 2020. URL [https://doi.org/10.1109/ICASSP40776.2020.9052942](https://doi.org/10.1109/ICASSP40776.2020.9052942).
- Kharitonov et al. (2023) Eugene Kharitonov, Damien Vincent, Zalán Borsos, Raphaël Marinier, Sertan Girgin, Olivier Pietquin, Matthew Sharifi, Marco Tagliasacchi, and Neil Zeghidour. Speak, read and prompt: High-fidelity text-to-speech with minimal supervision. _CoRR_, abs/2302.03540, 2023. URL [https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.03540](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.03540).
- Kim et al. (2021) Jaehyeon Kim, Jungil Kong, and Juhee Son. Conditional variational autoencoder with adversarial learning for end-to-end text-to-speech. In _Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2021, 18-24 July 2021, Virtual Event_, volume 139, pp.  5530–5540. PMLR, 2021. URL [http://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/kim21f.html](http://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/kim21f.html).
- Kreuk et al. (2023) Felix Kreuk, Gabriel Synnaeve, Adam Polyak, Uriel Singer, Alexandre Défossez, Jade Copet, Devi Parikh, Yaniv Taigman, and Yossi Adi. Audiogen: Textually guided audio generation. In _The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023_. OpenReview.net, 2023. URL [https://openreview.net/pdf?id=CYK7RfcOzQ4](https://openreview.net/pdf?id=CYK7RfcOzQ4).
- Kubichek (1993) R. Kubichek. Mel-cepstral distance measure for objective speech quality assessment. In _Proceedings of IEEE Pacific Rim Conference on Communications Computers and Signal Processing_, volume 1, pp.  125–128 vol.1, 1993. doi: [10.1109/PACRIM.1993.407206](10.1109/PACRIM.1993.407206).
- Kumar et al. (2023) Rithesh Kumar, Prem Seetharaman, Alejandro Luebs, Ishaan Kumar, and Kundan Kumar. High-fidelity audio compression with improved RVQGAN. _CoRR_, abs/2306.06546, 2023. URL [https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2306.06546](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2306.06546).
- Latif et al. (2023) Siddique Latif, Moazzam Shoukat, Fahad Shamshad, Muhammad Usama, Heriberto Cuayáhuitl, and Björn W. Schuller. Sparks of large audio models: A survey and outlook. _CoRR_, abs/2308.12792, 2023. URL [https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2308.12792](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2308.12792).
- Leviathan et al. (2023) Yaniv Leviathan, Matan Kalman, and Yossi Matias. Fast inference from transformers via speculative decoding. In _International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2023, 23-29 July 2023, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA_, volume 202 of _Proceedings of Machine Learning Research_, pp.  19274–19286. PMLR, 2023. URL [https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/leviathan23a.html](https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/leviathan23a.html).
- Li et al. (2022) Yinghao Aaron Li, Cong Han, and Nima Mesgarani. Styletts-vc: One-shot voice conversion by knowledge transfer from style-based TTS models. In _IEEE Spoken Language Technology Workshop, SLT 2022, Doha, Qatar, January 9-12, 2023_, pp.  920–927. IEEE, 2022. URL [https://doi.org/10.1109/SLT54892.2023.10022498](https://doi.org/10.1109/SLT54892.2023.10022498).
- Loshchilov & Hutter (2019) Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In _7th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019_. OpenReview.net, 2019. URL [https://openreview.net/forum?id=Bkg6RiCqY7](https://openreview.net/forum?id=Bkg6RiCqY7).
- Miao et al. (2021) Chenfeng Miao, Shuang Liang, Zhengchen Liu, Minchuan Chen, Jun Ma, Shaojun Wang, and Jing Xiao. EfficientTTS: An efficient and high-quality text-to-speech architecture. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), _Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2021, 18-24 July 2021, Virtual Event_, volume 139 of _Proceedings of Machine Learning Research_, pp.  7700–7709. PMLR, 2021. URL [http://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/miao21a.html](http://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/miao21a.html).
- Müller (2007) Meinard Müller. Dynamic time warping. _Information Retrieval for Music and Motion_, pp.  69–84, 2007.
- Panayotov et al. (2015) Vassil Panayotov, Guoguo Chen, Daniel Povey, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. Librispeech: An ASR corpus based on public domain audio books. In _2015 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, ICASSP 2015, South Brisbane, Queensland, Australia, April 19-24, 2015_, pp.  5206–5210. IEEE, 2015. URL [https://doi.org/10.1109/ICASSP.2015.7178964](https://doi.org/10.1109/ICASSP.2015.7178964).
- Peng et al. (2023) Yifan Peng, Yui Sudo, Muhammad Shakeel, and Shinji Watanabe. DPHuBERT: Joint distillation and pruning of self-supervised speech models. _CoRR_, abs/2305.17651, 2023. URL [https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.17651](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.17651).
- Pfeiffer et al. (2023) Jonas Pfeiffer, Sebastian Ruder, Ivan Vulić, and Edoardo Maria Ponti. Modular deep learning. _CoRR_, abs/2302.11529, 2023. URL [https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.11529](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.11529).
- Plaquet & Bredin (2023) Alexis Plaquet and Hervé Bredin. Powerset multi-class cross entropy loss for neural speaker diarization. _CoRR_, abs/2310.13025, 2023. URL [https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2310.13025](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2310.13025).
- Pratap et al. (2020) Vineel Pratap, Qiantong Xu, Anuroop Sriram, Gabriel Synnaeve, and Ronan Collobert. MLS: A large-scale multilingual dataset for speech research. In Helen Meng, Bo Xu, and Thomas Fang Zheng (eds.), _Interspeech 2020, 21st Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication Association, Virtual Event, Shanghai, China, 25-29 October 2020_, pp.  2757–2761. ISCA, 2020. URL [https://doi.org/10.21437/Interspeech.2020-2826](https://doi.org/10.21437/Interspeech.2020-2826).
- Pratap et al. (2023) Vineel Pratap, Andros Tjandra, Bowen Shi, Paden Tomasello, Arun Babu, Sayani Kundu, Ali Elkahky, Zhaoheng Ni, Apoorv Vyas, Maryam Fazel-Zarandi, Alexei Baevski, Yossi Adi, Xiaohui Zhang, Wei-Ning Hsu, Alexis Conneau, and Michael Auli. Scaling speech technology to 1, 000+ languages. _CoRR_, abs/2305.13516, 2023. URL [https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.13516](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.13516).
- Raffel et al. (2020) Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. _Journal of Machine Learning Research_, 21:140:1–140:67, 2020. URL [http://jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-074.html](http://jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-074.html).
- Shen et al. (2023) Kai Shen, Zeqian Ju, Xu Tan, Yanqing Liu, Yichong Leng, Lei He, Tao Qin, Sheng Zhao, and Jiang Bian. NaturalSpeech 2: Latent diffusion models are natural and zero-shot speech and singing synthesizers. _CoRR_, abs/2304.09116, 2023. URL [https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.09116](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.09116).
- Su et al. (2021) Jianlin Su, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Bo Wen, and Yunfeng Liu. RoFormer: Enhanced transformer with rotary position embedding. _CoRR_, abs/2104.09864, 2021. URL [https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.09864](https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.09864).
- Tsai et al. (2022) Hsiang-Sheng Tsai, Heng-Jui Chang, Wen-Chin Huang, Zili Huang, Kushal Lakhotia, Shu-Wen Yang, Shuyan Dong, Andy T. Liu, Cheng-I Lai, Jiatong Shi, Xuankai Chang, Phil Hall, Hsuan-Jui Chen, Shang-Wen Li, Shinji Watanabe, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Hung-yi Lee. SUPERB-SG: enhanced speech processing universal performance benchmark for semantic and generative capabilities. In Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio (eds.), _Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2022, Dublin, Ireland, May 22-27, 2022_, pp.  8479–8492. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2022. URL [https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.580](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.580).
- Vaswani et al. (2017) Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In _Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA_, pp.  5998–6008, 2017.
- Wang et al. (2023) Chengyi Wang, Sanyuan Chen, Yu Wu, Ziqiang Zhang, Long Zhou, Shujie Liu, Zhuo Chen, Yanqing Liu, Huaming Wang, Jinyu Li, Lei He, Sheng Zhao, and Furu Wei. Neural codec language models are zero-shot text to speech synthesizers. _CoRR_, abs/2301.02111, 2023. URL [https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2301.02111](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2301.02111).
- Wu et al. (2022) Yihan Wu, Xu Tan, Bohan Li, Lei He, Sheng Zhao, Ruihua Song, Tao Qin, and Tie-Yan Liu. Adaspeech 4: Adaptive text to speech in zero-shot scenarios. In Hanseok Ko and John H. L. Hansen (eds.), _Interspeech 2022, 23rd Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication Association, Incheon, Korea, 18-22 September 2022_, pp.  2568–2572. ISCA, 2022. URL [https://doi.org/10.21437/Interspeech.2022-901](https://doi.org/10.21437/Interspeech.2022-901).
- Xue et al. (2023) Jinlong Xue, Yayue Deng, Fengping Wang, Ya Li, Yingming Gao, Jianhua Tao, Jianqing Sun, and Jiaen Liang. M$`^{\text{2}}`$-ctts: End-to-end multi-scale multi-modal conversational text-to-speech synthesis. In _IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing ICASSP 2023, Rhodes Island, Greece, June 4-10, 2023_, pp.  1–5. IEEE, 2023. URL [https://doi.org/10.1109/ICASSP49357.2023.10096905](https://doi.org/10.1109/ICASSP49357.2023.10096905).
- Xue et al. (2022) Linting Xue, Aditya Barua, Noah Constant, Rami Al-Rfou, Sharan Narang, Mihir Kale, Adam Roberts, and Colin Raffel. ByT5: Towards a token-free future with pre-trained byte-to-byte models. _Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics_, 10:291–306, 2022. doi: [10.1162/tacl_a_00461](10.1162/tacl_a_00461). URL [https://aclanthology.org/2022.tacl-1.17](https://aclanthology.org/2022.tacl-1.17).
- Yang et al. (2023) Dongchao Yang, Songxiang Liu, Rongjie Huang, Guangzhi Lei, Chao Weng, Helen Meng, and Dong Yu. InstructTTS: Modelling expressive TTS in discrete latent space with natural language style prompt. _CoRR_, abs/2301.13662, 2023. URL [https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2301.13662](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2301.13662).
- Zeghidour et al. (2022) Neil Zeghidour, Alejandro Luebs, Ahmed Omran, Jan Skoglund, and Marco Tagliasacchi. Soundstream: An end-to-end neural audio codec. _IEEE ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language Processing_, 30:495–507, 2022. URL [https://doi.org/10.1109/TASLP.2021.3129994](https://doi.org/10.1109/TASLP.2021.3129994).
- Zen et al. (2019) Heiga Zen, Viet Dang, Rob Clark, Yu Zhang, Ron J. Weiss, Ye Jia, Zhifeng Chen, and Yonghui Wu. LibriTTS: A corpus derived from librispeech for text-to-speech. In Gernot Kubin and Zdravko Kacic (eds.), _Interspeech 2019, 20th Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication Association, Graz, Austria, 15-19 September 2019_, pp.  1526–1530. ISCA, 2019. URL [https://doi.org/10.21437/Interspeech.2019-2441](https://doi.org/10.21437/Interspeech.2019-2441).
- Zhang et al. (2021) Chen Zhang, Yi Ren, Xu Tan, Jinglin Liu, Kejun Zhang, Tao Qin, Sheng Zhao, and Tie-Yan Liu. Denoispeech: Denoising text to speech with frame-level noise modeling. In _IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, ICASSP 2021, Toronto, ON, Canada, June 6-11, 2021_, pp.  7063–7067. IEEE, 2021. URL [https://doi.org/10.1109/ICASSP39728.2021.9413934](https://doi.org/10.1109/ICASSP39728.2021.9413934).
- Zhang et al. (2023) Xin Zhang, Dong Zhang, Shimin Li, Yaqian Zhou, and Xipeng Qiu. SpeechTokenizer: Unified speech tokenizer for speech large language models. _CoRR_, abs/2308.16692, 2023. URL [https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2308.16692](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2308.16692).
- Zhu et al. (2023) Xinfa Zhu, Yuanjun Lv, Yi Lei, Tao Li, Wendi He, Hongbin Zhou, Heng Lu, and Lei Xie. Vec-Tok Speech: Speech vectorization and tokenization for neural speech generation. _CoRR_, abs/2310.07246, 2023. URL [https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2310.07246](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2310.07246).

## Appendix A Appendix

### A.1 Pheme Model: Architecture

The parameters of the T2S and A2S components, both coming in two different sizes, are summarized in Table 5.

| Variant   | \# layers (enc) | \# layers (dec) | Hidden dim | FFN dim | Head dim | \# heads |
| --------- | --------------- | --------------- | ---------- | ------- | -------- | -------- |
| T2S-small | 6               | 6               | 512        | 2,048   | 64       | 8        |
| T2S-large | 14              | 14              | 512        | 2,048   | 64       | 8        |

| Variant   | \# Conformer layers | Kernel size | Hidden dim | FFN dim | \# heads |
| --------- | ------------------- | ----------- | ---------- | ------- | -------- |
| A2S-small | 3                   | 5           | 1,024      | 1,024   | 8        |
| A2S-large | 8                   | 5           | 1,024      | 1,024   | 8        |

Table 5: Architecture details for the two components of Pheme with different sizes.
