---
arxiv_id: "2402.06304"
title: A New Approach to Voice Authenticity
authors:
  - Nicolas M. Müller
  - Piotr Kawa
  - Shen Hu
  - Matthias Neu
  - Jennifer Williams
  - Philip Sperl
  - Konstantin Böttinger
submitted: "2024-02-09"
categories:
  - cs.SD
  - cs.AI
  - eess.AS
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.06304
source: arxiv-html
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 0/0
citations_resolved_at: "2026-07-07T16:17:40+00:00"
references_parsed: 0
arxiv_version: ""
---

\interspeechcameraready\name

\[affiliation=1\]Nicolas M.Müller \name\[affiliation=2\]PiotrKawa \name\[affiliation=3\]ShenHu \name\[affiliation=4\]MatthiasNeu \name\[affiliation=5\]JenniferWilliams \name\[affiliation=1\]PhilipSperl \name\[affiliation=1\]KonstantinBöttinger

# A New Approach to Voice Authenticity

###### Abstract

Voice faking, driven primarily by recent advances in text-to-speech (TTS) synthesis technology, poses significant societal challenges. Currently, the prevailing assumption is that unaltered human speech can be considered genuine, while fake speech comes from TTS synthesis. We argue that this binary distinction is oversimplified. For instance, altered playback speeds can be used for malicious purposes, like in the \`Drunken Nancy Pelosi' incident. Similarly, editing of audio clips can be done ethically, e.g. for brevity or summarization in news reporting or podcasts, but editing can also create misleading narratives. In this paper, we propose a conceptual shift away from the binary paradigm of audio being either \`fake' or \`real'. Instead, our focus is on pinpointing \`voice edits', which encompass traditional modifications like filters and cuts, as well as TTS synthesis and Voice Conversion (VC) systems. We delineate 6 categories and curate a new challenge dataset rooted in the M-AILABS corpus, for which we present baseline detection systems. And most importantly, we argue that merely categorizing audio as fake or real is a dangerous over-simplification that will fail to move the field of speech technology forward.

###### keywords:

voice edits,voice anti-spoofing, deepfake,text-to-speech synthesis

## 1 Introduction

The rapidly advancing field of machine learning has significantly enhanced the quality and computability of text-to-speech (TTS) synthesis technology, opening the door to a myriad of beneficial applications \[parrotron, Respeech99, tts-audiobooks, siri\]. However, that same forward progress also brings forth serious threats to our understanding and perception of authentic speech, including the creation of deepfakes aimed at deceiving the human ear. The result has become more clear in recent years with the spread of misinformation, fake news, slander, fraud, AI-mediated pornography, and deceptive calls \[audio-scam, audio-scam-2, audio-fake-news\]. Speech synthesis technology becomes particularly perilous when used to trick automatic speaker verification and biometric identification systems - a practice known as \`spoofing' \[vice-breaking-bank\].

The anti-spoofing community has responded by establishing challenge datasets and spoofing detection algorithm benchmarks such as ASVspoof 2015, 2017, 2019 \[todisco2019asvspoof\] and 2021 \[asvspoof2021\], pouring extensive efforts into differentiating between genuine (\`bona-fide') and counterfeit (\`spoof') speech samples. While these datasets, algorithms, and evaluation metrics are adequate within the scope of anti-spoofing protection for speaker verification, they fall short in addressing broader societal challenges posed by technologies used for making deepfakes. Particularly, the binary idea that all TTS/VC-generated synthetic speech is inherently deceptive (and fake), while all other content is benign (and genuine), is an oversimplification. Despite this false equivalence, it is a viewpoint widely held both inside and outside of the speech technology community and among voice authenticity researchers \[todisco2019asvspoof, asvspoof2021, in-the-wild, add2022\].

The reality of assessing fake and genuine audio is complex and context-dependent. For instance, altering playback speeds - a technique maliciously used in scenarios like the \`Drunken Nancy Pelosi' \[drunk_pelosi\] incident - can also serve benign purposes, such as in language learning tools or assistance for the hearing-impaired. Similarly, even the removal or reordering of words can fabricate misleading narratives \[FoxNewse71\] that use real human speech, yet these same editing techniques are valid in concise, legitimate formats such as news broadcasts or podcasts. Finally, audio can be edited through equalization to subtly alter the quality of a politician's voice by adjusting bass and treble levels, as well as overall pitch. Equalization adjustments can affect how sincere or confident a politician sounds. Even unintentional manipulation can degrade speech sound quality, thereby negatively influencing public perception \[speech_edits_pol\], which has already been observed in political campaigns \[TVPcelow97\].

Furthermore, not all synthetic speech warrants skepticism. Consider the speech synthesis used by the late physicist Stephen Hawking for accessibility purposes. Likewise, the \`Google Parrotron' \[parrotron\] project aims to help people with partial speech impairments, using the same TTS synthesis techniques that enable spoofs and deepfakes. Lastly, in the field of politics, TTS synthesis has been used both ethically and unethically in automated calls. One the one hand, it has been used to impersonate US President Biden and encourage people to skip the 2024 primary election in the state of New Hampshire \[robocall_biden\]. On the other hand, the US Democratic Party has used it to connect with new potential voters \[robocall_ashley\]. This underscores the necessity for a nuanced understanding of \`synthetic' and \`authentic' in audio content—a delineation that is not merely black and white but incorporates the myriad shades of intention and context.

Contribution. Our paper introduces a structured approach and new way of thinking about challenges for handling voice-edited audio. We introduce a new dataset that reflects this paradigm shift. We also propose several baseline machine learning models capable of identifying and classifying audio modifications in the dataset, including the nature of the edit and its location in the time domain. Our evaluation confirms that models are effective at accurately detecting a variety of audio modifications and edits. Using this dataset as the basis, we call for a fundamental shift in voice authenticity research efforts, away from the simplistic real/fake classification and toward a more nuanced approach.

## 2 Related Work

### 2.1 Detection of Audio Modifications

The domain of audio modification detection encompasses various challenges, including the identification of double compression, codec recognition, and the detection of copy-move or splicing operations, which involve the deletion or insertion of audio segments \[double-mp3, audio-tampering-survey, audio-tampering-survey-2\]. Efforts in this area include the analysis of electric network frequency (ENF) signals \[esquef2014edit\], as well as investigations into microphone and acoustic characteristics \[audio-tampering-survey-2\]. Despite these endeavors, the literature remains sparse, with no existing work providing as detailed a classification of vocal alterations or as current an overview of neural network-based detection methodologies as presented in this study.

### 2.2 Voice Authenticity Attacks

Voice authenticity attacks are commonly categorized into three primary scenarios: physical access spoofing, logical access spoofing, and deepfakes. This taxonomy is reflected in the datasets developed by the research community. Physical access spoofing targets automatic speaker verification (ASV) systems with replay attacks, where utterances are recorded and replayed under varied acoustic conditions \[todisco2019asvspoof, asvspoof2021, asvspoof-2017, idiap-voicepa\]. Logical access spoofing entails remote attacks on ASV systems, such as biometric identification in telephone call. Corresponding techniques include the injection of spoofed audio, created using text-to-speech and voice conversion techniques, into the communication channel \[asvspoof2021, idiap-avspoof, asvspoof-2015\]. Deepfake technology aims to generate artificial speech that can deceive human listeners, focusing on disinformation spread via social media, using similar techniques as logical access spoofing but targeting humans instead of voice biometric systems \[asvspoof2021, add2022, add2023, cfad\].

### 2.3 Deeepfake and Spoofing Detection

The development of anti-spoofing and deepfake detection algorithms primarily relies on deep neural networks, diverging into two main branches based on the nature of the input data. The first branch utilizes raw audio waveforms, requiring no prior transformations \[tak2021EndtoEnd, ge2021raw, aasist\], while the second focuses on transformed audio signals to highlight features indicative of spoofed material \[wang2021Comparative, muller2023complex\]. Self-supervised learning models and embeddings from other audio processing architectures have also been proposed \[zhang2021fake, ssl_antispoof, whisper-df\]. Challenges in the detection of voice spoofs and deepfakes include ensuring the generalization of trained methods. This is currently addressed by incorporating a wide array of generation methods, codecs, and audio quality within the training datasets. Other focal points include partial spoofs, multi-modal deepfakes, synthesized singing voices detection, real-world deepfake utterances, and language diversity \[in-the-wild, cfad, had, partial-spoof, fakeavceleb, sing-fake, mlaad\]. Despite the extensive taxonomy, existing classifications do not consider traditional attack vectors such as slicing and pitch alteration. There is no comprehensive database or benchmark addressing both neural and \`traditional' audio manipulations.

## 3 Voice Edit Categories

In table 3, we identify 6 overarching categories of voice edits that contribute to voice authenticity. Each category is based on a different type of audio modification which can affect the perception of voice and voice quality. From these high-level categories, we present 21 unique voice edits (encircled in numerals).

|               |
| ------------- |
| Source Origin |

Table 1: Voice Edit Categories
