---
arxiv_id: "2402.12423"
title: On the Semantic Latent Space of Diffusion-Based Text-to-Speech Models
authors:
  - Miri Varshavsky-Hassid et.al.
submitted: "2024-02-19"
categories: []
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.12423
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 10/24
citations_resolved_at: "2026-07-07T16:17:36+00:00"
references_parsed: 24
arxiv_version: ""
---

## Implementation Details

For demonstration, we use Grad-TTS , a recently published publicly available diffusion-based TTS model, trained on LibriTTS . However, our method can also be applied to any other unguided diffusion-based TTS model that contains a bottleneck. Grad-TTS takes a text and a speaker embedding as input, and generates a clean mel-spectogram through a U-Net-based denoiser. We use 10 diffusion timesteps for mel-spectogram generation, as suggested by Grad-TTS authors, followed by the Universal HifiGan vocoder for waveform generation.

## Supervised Latent Space Editing

We begin our analysis by exploring the semantic-capturing capabilities of _h-space_ using the per-speaker gender annotations available for LibriTTS. Capturing the latent code during all timesteps of the generation process and following Equation <a href="#eq:supervised" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:supervised">[eq:supervised]</a>, we calculate the male-to-female latent direction, and utilize it for audio editing as outlined in Equation <a href="#eq:edit" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:edit">[eq:edit]</a>. As the latent vectors’ lengths vary with the input texts, editing direction is defined per text. For a comparable baseline, we use another, simpler, approach for gender-editing: manipulating the speaker embedding, which is provided to the model as an input. We calculate the male-to-female direction in the speaker embedding space in a similar manner by averaging the differences of speaker embeddings between pairs of male and female speakers. The input speaker embedding is modified by adding this direction with different scales ($`\lambda`$). We provide supplemental samples, demonstrating the suggested audio editing methods: <https://latent-analysis-grad-tts.github.io/speech-samples/>.

**Semantic properties evaluation**. We fine-tuned a speech gender classifier on Grad-TTS outputs, acknowledging the different quality of synthesized speech compared to human-recorded samples. Then, we applied gender editing via both latent space and speaker embedding editing using varying $`\lambda`$ values, across the first 50 texts of the LibriTTS test set and all 247 speakers. In Figure <a href="#fig:supervised_fig" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:supervised_fig">3</a> we report the fraction of samples classified as female for each $`\lambda`$ value, averaged across input male and female speakers separately. Latent space editing exhibits a monotonic behavior with more samples classified as female as $`\lambda`$ increases. On the contrary, speaker embedding editing fails to transform male voices to female ones, and when $`\lambda \geq 3`$ even originally female voices are not classified as such.

Additionally, 10 human evaluators classified speech samples as male or female. Analyzing samples from 20 different speakers, we compared the unedited Grad-TTS outputs to the gender-edited samples. For an effective gender alteration as shown in Figure <a href="#fig:supervised_fig" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:supervised_fig">3</a>, we used $`\lambda=2`$ and $`-2`$ for male-to-female and female-to-male editing, respectively. Table <a href="#tab:supervised" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:supervised">1</a> presents the accuracy of predicting the expected gender (original gender for original samples, and contrasting gender for edited samples). Comparing to speaker editing, latent space editing achieves a classification accuracy that is higher by 24%, with statistical significance (p-value $`< 0.001`$).

<figure id="fig:supervised_fig">
<figure id="fig:latent_arithmetics">
<embed src="Figures/latent_arithmetics_gender_average_all_speakers.pdf" />
<figcaption>Latent space editing</figcaption>
</figure>
<figure id="fig:speaker_arithmetics">
<embed src="Figures/speaker_arithmetics_gender_average_all.pdf" />
<figcaption>Speaker embedding editing</figcaption>
</figure>
<figcaption>Supervised latent space editing allows gender manipulation, while speaker embedding editing does not. The percentage of samples classified as female is reported separately for male and female input spakers, averaged across 50 texts and all speakers (standard deviation, STD, is shaded).</figcaption>
</figure>

<div id="tab:supervised">

| **Method**                  | **Gender acc. $`\mathbf{\uparrow}`$** | **MOS $`\mathbf{\uparrow}`$** |
| :-------------------------- | :-----------------------------------: | :---------------------------: |
| Grad-TTS                    |           $`0.82 \pm 0.14`$           |       $`3.95 \pm 0.15`$       |
| Speaker Editing             |                                       |                               |
| Latent Editing              |                                       |                               |
| **\*\*\* p-value \< 0.001** |                                       |                               |

Supervised latent space editing generates intelligible samples where the perceived speaker’s gender is correctly classified, while speaker embedding editing does not. Average gender accuracy and MOS (mean $`\pm`$ STD) are reported. Latent-editing results compared to speaker-editing results are statistically significant (using   rank sum test).

</div>

**Acoustic properties evaluation**. To assess the perceived naturalness of the generated speech we measure the Mean Opinion Score (MOS), as quantified by 10 experienced evaluators on a scale of 1 to 5, across the same set of samples reported before. Table <a href="#tab:supervised" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:supervised">1</a> shows that the perceived naturalness of latent space editing, compared to speaker editing, is higher by $`12\%`$, a statistically significant difference (p-value $`<0.001`$). This, combined with the superior perceived gender editing quality, reinforces the latent space’s capability to encapsulate non-trivial semantic information.

## Unsupervised Latent Space Editing

Next, we investigate semantically meaningful directions in _h-space_ without prior annotations. First, we generated speech samples for the first 50 test texts of LibriTTS and across all 247 speakers, and recorded the latent vectors $`\textbf{h}_{T:1}`$. Then, following the unsupervised process defined in Section <a href="#sec:edit" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:edit">[sec:edit]</a>, PCA of the latent space was performed for each text across all samples, calculating the first 3 principal components (PCs). As vocal attributes, for each speech sample we extracted its speaker’s gender from the metadata, and measured its intensity, Harmonics-to-Noise Ratio (HNR), and pitch using the Parselmouth Python package .

The latent vectors of each sample were projected onto each PC. Next, we calculated the absolute value Spearman correlation between each vocal attribute and PC-projection vector, averaging across texts and timesteps. As Figure <a href="#fig:correlation_fig" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:correlation_fig">4</a> shows, PC1 strongly correlates ($`\rho=0.9\pm0.0`$) with speaker’s gender (also see Figure <a href="#fig:pcs" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:pcs">[fig:pcs]</a> in Appendix <a href="#sec:appendix_results" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:appendix_results">[sec:appendix_results]</a>), while PC2 correlates ($`\rho=0.6\pm0.1`$) with intensity and HNR. Other PCs and vocal attributes show no significant correlation and neither did random projections in the latent space (see Figure <a href="#fig:correlation_fig_rand_proj" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:correlation_fig_rand_proj">[fig:correlation_fig_rand_proj]</a> in Appendix <a href="#sec:appendix_results" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:appendix_results">[sec:appendix_results]</a>).

<figure id="fig:correlation_fig" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="Figures/PCs_correaltion.pdf" style="width:45.0%" />
<figcaption>Absolute values of the Spearman correlation between the latent space PC-projections and the vocal attributes of the generated speech. We report mean and STD across all speakers, timesteps, and 50 texts.</figcaption>
</figure>

**Semantic properties evaluation**. Using PCs as editing directions in _h-space_, we explore speech editing capabilities. Since the PCs are unitary vectors, the editing directions were normalized to the norm of the latent vectors. Intriguingly, our experiments indicate that decreasing the editing norm at later timesteps improves acoustic quality. As can be seen in Figure <a href="#fig:PC0" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:PC0">5</a>, interpolation along PC1 exhibits a smooth transition between male and female voices. Simialrly, intensity and HNR decrease when interpolating along PC2 (see Figure <a href="#fig:PC1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:PC1">6</a>). Importantly, no gender-editing occurs when interpolating along PC2 (see Figure <a href="#fig:disentanglement" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:disentanglement">[fig:disentanglement]</a> in Appendix <a href="#sec:appendix_results" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:appendix_results">[sec:appendix_results]</a>).

Additionally, we measured the accuracy of gender classification as evaluated by human annotators on the same 20 speakers. Following the analysis in Figure <a href="#fig:unsup" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:unsup">7</a>, to ensure effective gender alteration, we used $`\lambda=3`$ or $`-3`$ for originally male or originally female speakers, respectively, while editing along PC1. For PC2, $`\lambda=-2`$ was used to maximize HNR. PC1-edited samples were successfully classified as the contrasting gender with an even higher accuracy than un-edited ones (Table <a href="#tab:unsuervised" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:unsuervised">2</a>).

<figure id="fig:unsup">
<figure id="fig:PC0">
<embed src="Figures/PC0_gender_average_all.pdf" style="width:100.0%" />
<figcaption>Latent editing along PC1</figcaption>
</figure>
<figure id="fig:PC1">
<embed src="Figures/PC1_attributes_average_all_speakers_no_change.pdf" style="width:100.0%" />
<figcaption>Latent editing along PC2</figcaption>
</figure>
<figcaption>Interpolation along the semantic directions revealed by PCA changes the vocal attributes accordingly. The reported values are averaged over 50 texts and all speakers. Shaded area is the STD.</figcaption>
</figure>

<div id="tab:unsuervised">

| **Method**             | **Gender acc. $`\mathbf{\uparrow}`$** | **MOS $`\mathbf{\uparrow}`$** |
| :--------------------- | :-----------------------------------: | :---------------------------: |
| Grad-TTS               |                                       |       $`3.95 \pm 0.15`$       |
| PC1 Editing            |                                       |       $`3.86 \pm 0.20`$       |
| PC2 Editing            |                                       |       $`3.98 \pm 0.17`$       |
| **\* p-value \< 0.05** |                                       |                               |

Gender accuracy and MOS results (mean $`\pm`$ STD) for unsupervised latent space editing.

</div>

**Acoustic properties evaluation**. Using the same setup, we assessed speech naturalness using MOS. Table <a href="#tab:unsuervised" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:unsuervised">2</a> compares the perceived naturalness of samples with and without latent editing, presenting similar scores between the groups. The Wilcoxon rank sum test indicated no statistically significant difference in the MOS between groups (p-value $`\gg 0.05`$). Thus, we conclude that speech editing through unsupervised latent space manipulation does not compromise the acoustic quality.

## References

1. Sai Satya Vamsi~Karthik Bhamidipati. 2023.
   \newblock multi-task-speech-classification.
   \newblock \url{https://github.com/karthikbhamidipati/multi-task-speech-classification}.
2. Nanxin Chen, Yu~Zhang, Heiga Zen, Ron~J Weiss, Mohammad Norouzi, and William Chan. 2020.
   \newblock Wavegrad: Estimating gradients for waveform generation.
   \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.00713}. [arXiv:2009.00713](https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.00713)
3. Nanxin Chen, Yu~Zhang, Heiga Zen, Ron~J Weiss, Mohammad Norouzi, Najim Dehak, and William Chan. 2021.
   \newblock Wavegrad 2: Iterative refinement for text-to-speech synthesis.
   \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09660}. [arXiv:2106.09660](../2021/2106.09660.md)
4. Yiwei Guo, Chenpeng Du, Xie Chen, and Kai Yu. 2023{\natexlab{a}}.
   \newblock Emodiff: Intensity controllable emotional text-to-speech with soft-label guidance.
   \newblock In \emph{ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 1--5. IEEE.
5. Zhifang Guo, Yichong Leng, Yihan Wu, Sheng Zhao, and Xu~Tan. 2023{\natexlab{b}}.
   \newblock Prompttts: Controllable text-to-speech with text descriptions.
   \newblock In \emph{ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 1--5. IEEE.
6. René Haas, Inbar Huberman-Spiegelglas, Rotem Mulayoff, and Tomer Michaeli. 2023.
   \newblock \href {http://arxiv.org/abs/2303.11073} {Discovering interpretable directions in the semantic latent space of diffusion models}.
7. Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. 2020.
   \newblock Denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
   \newblock \emph{Advances in neural information processing systems}, 33:6840--6851.
8. Rongjie Huang, Max~WY Lam, Jun Wang, Dan Su, Dong Yu, Yi~Ren, and Zhou Zhao. 2022{\natexlab{a}}.
   \newblock Fastdiff: A fast conditional diffusion model for high-quality speech synthesis.
   \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.09934}. [arXiv:2204.09934](../2022/2204.09934.md)
9. Rongjie Huang, Zhou Zhao, Huadai Liu, Jinglin Liu, Chenye Cui, and Yi~Ren. 2022{\natexlab{b}}.
   \newblock Prodiff: Progressive fast diffusion model for high-quality text-to-speech.
   \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Multimedia}, pages 2595--2605.
10. Yannick Jadoul, Bill Thompson, and Bart de~Boer. 2018.
    \newblock \href {https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wocn.2018.07.001} {Introducing {P}arselmouth: A {P}ython interface to {P}raat}.
    \newblock \emph{Journal of Phonetics}, 71:1--15.
11. Myeonghun Jeong, Hyeongju Kim, Sung~Jun Cheon, Byoung~Jin Choi, and Nam~Soo Kim. 2021.
    \newblock Diff-tts: A denoising diffusion model for text-to-speech.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.01409}. [arXiv:2104.01409](../2021/2104.01409.md)
12. Sungwon Kim, Heeseung Kim, and Sungroh Yoon. 2022.
    \newblock Guided-tts 2: A diffusion model for high-quality adaptive text-to-speech with untranscribed data.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.15370}. [arXiv:2205.15370](../2022/2205.15370.md)
13. Peter~E Kloeden, Eckhard Platen, Peter~E Kloeden, and Eckhard Platen. 1992.
    \newblock \emph{Stochastic differential equations}.
    \newblock Springer.
14. Jungil Kong, Jaehyeon Kim, and Jaekyoung Bae. 2020{\natexlab{a}}.
    \newblock \href {https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/file/c5d736809766d46260d816d8dbc9eb44-Paper.pdf} {Hifi-gan: Generative adversarial networks for efficient and high fidelity speech synthesis}.
    \newblock In \emph{Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems}, volume~33, pages 17022--17033. Curran Associates, Inc.
15. Zhifeng Kong, Wei Ping, Jiaji Huang, Kexin Zhao, and Bryan Catanzaro. 2020{\natexlab{b}}.
    \newblock Diffwave: A versatile diffusion model for audio synthesis.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.09761}. [arXiv:2009.09761](../2020/2009.09761.md)
16. Mingi Kwon, Jaeseok Jeong, and Youngjung Uh. 2022.
    \newblock Diffusion models already have a semantic latent space.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.10960}. [arXiv:2210.10960](https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.10960)
17. Songxiang Liu, Dan Su, and Dong Yu. 2022.
    \newblock Diffgan-tts: High-fidelity and efficient text-to-speech with denoising diffusion gans.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11972}. [arXiv:2201.11972](../2022/2201.11972.md)
18. Vadim Popov, Ivan Vovk, Vladimir Gogoryan, Tasnima Sadekova, and Mikhail Kudinov. 2021.
    \newblock \href {https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/popov21a.html} {Grad-tts: A diffusion probabilistic model for text-to-speech}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning}, volume 139 of \emph{Proceedings of Machine Learning Research}, pages 8599--8608. PMLR.
19. Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. 2015.
    \newblock U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation.
    \newblock In \emph{Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention--MICCAI 2015: 18th International Conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, Proceedings, Part III 18}, pages 234--241. Springer.
20. Kai Shen, Zeqian Ju, Xu~Tan, Yanqing Liu, Yichong Leng, Lei He, Tao Qin, Sheng Zhao, and Jiang Bian. 2023.
    \newblock Naturalspeech 2: Latent diffusion models are natural and zero-shot speech and singing synthesizers.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.09116}. [arXiv:2304.09116](../2023/2304.09116.md)
21. Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. 2015.
    \newblock Deep unsupervised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics.
    \newblock In \emph{International conference on machine learning}, pages 2256--2265. PMLR.
22. Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik~P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben Poole. 2020.
    \newblock Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.13456}. [arXiv:2011.13456](https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.13456)
23. Frank Wilcoxon. 1945.
    \newblock \href {http://www.jstor.org/stable/3001968} {Individual comparisons by ranking methods}.
    \newblock \emph{Biometrics Bulletin}, 1(6):80--83.
24. Heiga Zen, Rob Clark, Ron~J. Weiss, Viet Dang, Ye~Jia, Yonghui Wu, Yu~Zhang, and Zhifeng Chen. 2019.
    \newblock \href {https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.02882} {Libritts: A corpus derived from librispeech for text-to-speech}.
    \newblock In \emph{Interspeech}.
