---
arxiv_id: "2403.16973"
title: "VoiceCraft: Zero-Shot Speech Editing and Text-to-Speech in the Wild"
authors:
  - Puyuan Peng et.al.
submitted: "2024-03-25"
categories: []
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.16973
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 0/68
citations_resolved_at: "2026-07-07T16:16:54+00:00"
references_parsed: 68
arxiv_version: ""
---

# Method

 casts both sequence infilling (for speech editing) and continuation (for zero-shot TTS) as a simple left-to-right language modeling by rearranging neural codec’s output tokens. The rearrangement involves two steps: (1) causal masking (§<a href="#ssec:causal_masking" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="ssec:causal_masking">1.1</a>) to enable autoregressive continuation/infilling with bidirectional context and (2) delayed stacking (§<a href="#ssec:delayed_stacking" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="ssec:delayed_stacking">1.2</a>) to ensure efficient multi-codebook modeling.  employs decoder-only Transformers and is trained with an autoregressive sequence prediction (§<a href="#ssec:modeling" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="ssec:modeling">1.3</a>). We introduce the inference setup for speech editing and zero-shot TTS in §<a href="#ssec:inference" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="ssec:inference">[ssec:inference]</a>.

<figure id="fig:model">
<embed src="./src/figures/archi.pdf" />
<figcaption>An example of the token rearrangement procedure and modeling framework. The rearrangement procedure involves two steps: (1) <em>Causal masking</em>, where masked spans are replaced with mask tokens and moved to the end, and (2) <em>Delayed stacking</em>, where tokens are shifted in the time dimension based on their codebook index.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Rearrangement Step 1: Causal Masking

As shown on the left hand side of Fig. <a href="#fig:model" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:model">1</a>, given a continuous speech waveform as input, we first use Encodec  to quantize it into a $`T`$ by $`K`$ codec matrix $`X`$, where $`T`$ is the number of temporal frames, and $`K`$ is the number of RVQ codebooks. $`X`$ can be written as $`(X_1, \cdots, X_T)`$, where $`X_t`$ is a vector of length $`K`$ representing the codes from different codebooks at time step $`t`$, and we assume that code from codebook $`k`$ models the residual from codebook $`k-1`$. During training, our goal is to randomly mask some span of tokens $`(X_{t_0}, \dots, X_{t_1})`$, and then autoregressively predict these masked tokens conditioned on all of the unmasked tokens. This is a problem when $`t_1 < T`$, because we cannot condition on future outputs when performing autoregressive generation. We need to modify the masking on $`X`$ so that it is _causal_, by moving the span to be masked to the end of the sequence, so that when infilling these tokens the model can condition on both past and future unmasked tokens .

The procedure outlined above can be trivially extended to multiple masked spans by simply moving _all_ masked spans to the end of the sequence. The number of spans to be masked $`n`$ is sampled from $`\text{Poison}(\lambda)`$, and then for each span, we sample a span length $`l \sim \text{Uniform}(1,L)`$. Finally, we randomly select the locations of the spans within $`X`$ under the constraint that they do not overlap with each other. The selected $`n`$ spans are then replaced with mask tokens $`\text{\textlangle M$\_1$\textrangle}, \cdots, \text{\textlangle M$\_n$\textrangle}`$. The original tokens within these masked spans are moved to the end of the sequence $`X`$, with each span preceded by its corresponding mask token.

Consider this example: let $`X=(X_1, \dots, X_6)`$ and imagine we wish to mask a single span from $`X_2`$ to $`X_4`$. The original sequence $`X`$ is rearranged into $`Y=(Y_1; \text{\textlangle M$\_1$\textrangle}; Y_2;\text{\textlangle M$\_1$\textrangle}; Y_3;)`$, where $`Y_1=(X_1)`$, $`Y_2 = (X_5, X_6)`$, and $`Y_3 = (X_2, X_3, X_4)`$. We call $`Y_1`$ and $`Y_2`$ the unmasked spans, and $`Y_3`$ the masked span. An _end of span_ or `EOS` token is added to the end of each masked span (in this example at the end of $`Y_3`$), and an _end of utterance_ or `EOU` token is added to the end of the utterance (i.e. $`Y_2`$). For simplicity, we do not explicitly denote these special tokens and assume they are part of the spans.

## Rearrangement Step 2: Delayed Stacking

After the causal masking token rearrangement, each timestep of the rearranged matrix $`Y`$ is vector of $`K`$ tokens. observed that when performing autoregressive generation over stacked RVQ tokens, it is advantageous to apply a _delay pattern_ so that the prediction of codebook $`k`$ at time $`t`$ can be conditioned on the prediction of codebook $`k-1`$ from the same timestep. We take a similar approach which we describe here. Assume a span $`Y_s`$ is of shape $`L_s \times K`$. Applying the delay pattern rearranges it into $`Z_s = (Z_{s,0}, Z_{s,1}, \cdots,Z_{s,L_s + K -1})`$, where $`Z_{s,t}, t\in[L_s+K-1]`$ is defined as[^1]:

```math
\begin{align}
    Z_{s,t} = (Y_{s,t,1}, Y_{s,t+1,2}, \cdots, Y_{s,t-K+1,K})
\end{align}
```

where $`Y_{s, t-k+1, k}`$ denotes the token located at coordinate $`(t-k+1, k)`$ in matrix $`Y_s`$, i.e. the $`k`$th codebook entry at the $`(t-k+1)`$th timestep. To make sure that $`\forall t \in [L_s+K-1]`$, $`Z_{s,t}`$ contains $`K`$ valid tokens, we introduce a special learnable $`\texttt{[empty]}`$ token and define $`Y_{s, t-k+1, k} \triangleq \texttt{[empty]} \,, \forall t\in\{s:s<k \cup s-k+1>L_s\}`$. Note that the mask tokens are not part of any span and are not changed during delayed stacking. We define the resulting matrix of delayed stacking $`Z = (Z_1, \text{\textlangle M$_1$\textrangle}, Z_2, \text{\textlangle M$\_1$\textrangle},\cdots,\text{\textlangle M$_{\frac{S-1}{2}}$\textrangle}, Z_S)`$ (assuming $`Y`$ consists of $`S`$ spans). See the diagram for $`Z`$ in Fig. <a href="#fig:model" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:model">1</a> for an illustration.

## Modeling

As shown in the right hand side of Fig. <a href="#fig:model" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:model">1</a>, we use a Transformer decoder to model $`Z`$ autoregressively, conditioned on transcript of the speech $`W`$. Therefore, the input to the decoder is $`[W; Z]`$, where “;” denotes concatenation. At timestep $`t`$ of span $`s`$ in codec matrix $`Z`$, the model predicts all $`K`$ tokens of $`Z_{s,t}`$ simultaneously, by using $`K`$ MLP heads to project the transformer’s final hidden state to $`K`$ sets of logits, one for each of the $`K`$ codebooks. Note that the prediction is conditioned on transcript $`W`$, and all tokens in $`Z`$ before $`Z_{s,t}`$, denoted as $`H_{s,t}`$. Mathematically, the Transformer decoder models the factorized conditional distribution of $`Z`$:

```math
\begin{align}
    \mathbb{P}_{\theta}(Z|W) &= \prod_{s}\prod_{t} \mathbb{P}_{\theta}(Z_{s,t}|W, H_{s,t}) \label{eq:autoregressive}\\
           &= \prod_{s}\prod_{t} \prod_{k=1}^K \mathbb{P}_{\theta}(Z_{s,t,k}|W, H_{s,t}) \label{eq:factorize}
\end{align}
```

Where $`\theta`$ represent the parameters of the model. Equation <a href="#eq:autoregressive" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:autoregressive">[eq:autoregressive]</a> is the autoregressive factorization across time, while Equation <a href="#eq:factorize" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:factorize">[eq:factorize]</a> is the factorization across codebooks given an independence assumption - given $`W`$ and $`H_{s,t}`$, the $`K`$ RVQ codes in $`Z_{s,t}`$ are assumed to be independent of each other. We argue in appendix <a href="#sec:independence" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:independence">[sec:independence]</a> that this assumption is mild.

With the token level probability formulation in Equation <a href="#eq:factorize" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:factorize">[eq:factorize]</a>, we derive the training loss as the negative log likelihood $`\mathcal{L}(\theta) = -\log \mathbb{P}_{\theta}(Z|W) = -\sum_{k=1}^K \mathcal{L}_k(\theta)`$. Empirically, we found that weighting the first residual codebooks more than the latter codebooks leads to better performance, and therefore our final loss is $`\mathcal{L}(\theta) = \sum_{k=1}^K \alpha_k \mathcal{L}_k(\theta)`$, where $`(\alpha_k)_{k=1}^K`$ are tunable hyperparameters. Note that we follow  and calculate the prediction loss on all tokens (not just the tokens in the masked spans), except for mask tokens and `[empty]` tokens.

## Inference

<span id="ssec:inference" label="ssec:inference"></span> **Speech Editing.** The setting for speech editing is the following: we have a speech recording $`R`$ and its transcript $`W`$, and we want the model to modify only the relevant spans of $`R`$ so that it matches the target transcript $`W'`$. We assume that $`W'`$ is an edited version of $`W`$, where some words have been inserted, substituted, or deleted. This task is almost exactly the same as the training task, with two differences: 1) during training, the input transcript is simply the transcript of the original recording $`W`$, while during inference it is a modified transcript $`W'`$ 2) during training, the spans to be masked (i.e. edited) are chosen randomly. During inference, we select them by comparing the original transcript and the target transcript to identify the words that should be masked out, and then use the word level forced alignment of the original transcript to identify the codec token spans that correspond to these words to be masked. To ensure a smooth transition between the edited speech and the unedited speech, the neighboring words surrounding the span to be edited also need to be slightly modified in order to model co-articulation effects. Therefore, we specify a small margin hyperparameter $`\epsilon`$, and extend the mask span length by $`\epsilon`$ on both the left and right sides[^2]. During autoregressive generation, we feed the model the target transcript with all unmasked spans, with mask tokens inserted in the locations where the edits should take place. We then have the model autoregressively continue this sequence, whereby it fills in the masked spans. The generated codec tokens are then spliced back into their correct location in the utterance, and we map the complete codec token sequence back to a waveform using the Encodec decoder network.

**Zero-shot TTS.** As we previously noted, zero-shot TTS for our model is straightforward because it simply corresponds to performing an insertion edit at the end of the original utterance. In this case, the model is provided a voice prompt with its transcription, as well as the target transcript of the speech to be generated. The three inputs are concatenated together and fed to the model, after which it generates the codec sequence of the target transcript autoregressively.

[^1]: $`[N]`$ represents integer set $`\{0,1,\cdots,N\}`$

[^2]: for substitution and deletion, the spans that are to be masked are just those words that are different from the target plus the margin; for insertion, the spans are just left and right margin spanning from the middle of the two words where the insertion happens

## References

1. Armen Aghajanyan, Po-Yao~(Bernie) Huang, Candace Ross, Vladimir Karpukhin, Hu~Xu, Naman Goyal, Dmytro Okhonko, Mandar Joshi, Gargi Ghosh, Mike Lewis, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2022.
   \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:246035820} {Cm3: A causal masked multimodal model of the internet}.
   \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2201.07520.
2. Andrea Agostinelli, Timo~I. Denk, Zal{\'a}n Borsos, Jesse Engel, Mauro Verzetti, Antoine Caillon, Qingqing Huang, Aren Jansen, Adam Roberts, Marco Tagliasacchi, Matthew Sharifi, Neil Zeghidour, and Christian~Havn{\o} Frank. 2023.
   \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:256274504} {Musiclm: Generating music from text}.
   \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2301.11325.
3. He~Bai, Renjie Zheng, Junkun Chen, Xintong Li, Mingbo Ma, and Liang Huang. 2022.
   \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:247594399} {A3t: Alignment-aware acoustic and text pretraining for speech synthesis and editing}.
   \newblock In \emph{International Conference on Machine Learning}.
4. Mohammad Bavarian, Heewoo Jun, Nikolas~A. Tezak, John Schulman, Christine McLeavey, Jerry Tworek, and Mark Chen. 2022.
   \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:251135268} {Efficient training of language models to fill in the middle}.
   \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2207.14255.
5. Mathieu Bernard and Hadrien Titeux. 2021.
   \newblock \href {https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.03958} {Phonemizer: Text to phones transcription for multiple languages in python}.
   \newblock \emph{Journal of Open Source Software}, 6(68):3958.
6. Zal{\'a}n Borsos, Rapha{\"e}l Marinier, Damien Vincent, Eugene Kharitonov, Olivier Pietquin, Matthew Sharifi, Dominik Roblek, Olivier Teboul, David Grangier, Marco Tagliasacchi, and Neil Zeghidour. 2022{\natexlab{a}}.
   \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:252111134} {Audiolm: A language modeling approach to audio generation}.
   \newblock \emph{IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing}, 31:2523--2533.
7. Zal{\'a}n Borsos, Matthew Sharifi, and Marco Tagliasacchi. 2022{\natexlab{b}}.
   \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:246863394} {Speechpainter: Text-conditioned speech inpainting}.
   \newblock In \emph{Interspeech}.
8. Zal{\'a}n Borsos, Matthew Sharifi, Damien Vincent, Eugene Kharitonov, Neil Zeghidour, and Marco Tagliasacchi. 2023.
   \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:258715176} {Soundstorm: Efficient parallel audio generation}.
   \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2305.09636.
9. Edresson Casanova, Julian Weber, Christopher~Dane Shulby, Arnaldo~C{\^a}ndido J{\'u}nior, Eren G{\"o}lge, and Moacir~Antonelli Ponti. 2021.
   \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:244908340} {Yourtts: Towards zero-shot multi-speaker tts and zero-shot voice conversion for everyone}.
   \newblock In \emph{International Conference on Machine Learning}.
10. Guang Chen, Yu~Wu, Shujie Liu, Tao Liu, Xiaoyong Du, and Furu Wei. 2023.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:261100909} {Wavmark: Watermarking for audio generation}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2308.12770.
11. Guoguo Chen, Shuzhou Chai, Guan-Bo Wang, Jiayu Du, Weiqiang Zhang, Chao Weng, Dan Su, Daniel Povey, Jan Trmal, Junbo Zhang, Mingjie Jin, Sanjeev Khudanpur, Shinji Watanabe, Shuaijiang Zhao, Wei Zou, Xiangang Li, Xuchen Yao, Yongqing Wang, Yujun Wang, Zhao You, and Zhiyong Yan. 2021{\natexlab{a}}.
    \newblock Gigaspeech: An evolving, multi-domain asr corpus with 10,000 hours of transcribed audio.
    \newblock In \emph{Proc. Interspeech 2021}.
12. Sanyuan Chen, Chengyi Wang, Zhengyang Chen, Yu~Wu, Shujie Liu, Zhuo Chen, Jinyu Li, Naoyuki Kanda, Takuya Yoshioka, Xiong Xiao, Jian Wu, Long Zhou, Shuo Ren, Yanmin Qian, Yao Qian, Micheal Zeng, and Furu Wei. 2021{\natexlab{b}}.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:239885872} {Wavlm: Large-scale self-supervised pre-training for full stack speech processing}.
    \newblock \emph{IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing}, 16:1505--1518.
13. Ann Clifton, Sravana Reddy, Yongze Yu, Aasish Pappu, Rezvaneh Rezapour, Hamed Bonab, Maria Eskevich, Gareth Jones, Jussi Karlgren, Ben Carterette, and Rosie Jones. 2020.
    \newblock \href {https://www.aclweb.org/ anthology/2020.coling-main.519} {100,000 podcasts: A spoken {E}nglish document corpus}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Computational Linguistics}, pages 5903--5917, Barcelona, Spain (Online). International Committee on Computational Linguistics.
14. Jade Copet, Felix Kreuk, Itai Gat, Tal Remez, David Kant, Gabriel Synnaeve, Yossi Adi, and Alexandre Defossez. 2023.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:259108357} {Simple and controllable music generation}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2306.05284.
15. COQUI. 2023.
    \newblock Xtts v2.
    \newblock \url{https://huggingface.co/coqui/XTTS-v2}.
16. Alexandre Defossez, Jade Copet, Gabriel Synnaeve, and Yossi Adi. 2022.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:253097788} {High fidelity neural audio compression}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2210.13438.
17. Chris Donahue, Antoine Caillon, Adam Roberts, Ethan Manilow, Philippe Esling, Andrea Agostinelli, Mauro Verzetti, Ian Simon, Olivier Pietquin, Neil Zeghidour, and Jesse Engel. 2023.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:256390242} {Singsong: Generating musical accompaniments from singing}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2301.12662.
18. Chris Donahue, Mina Lee, and Percy Liang. 2020.
    \newblock \href {https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.225} {Enabling language models to fill in the blanks}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics}, pages 2492--2501, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
19. Chenpeng Du, Yiwei Guo, Feiyu Shen, Zhijun Liu, Zheng Liang, Xie Chen, Shuai Wang, Hui Zhang, and K.~Yu. 2024{\natexlab{a}}.
    \newblock Unicats: A unified context-aware text-to-speech framework with contextual vq-diffusion and vocoding.
    \newblock In \emph{AAAI}.
20. Chenpeng Du, Yiwei Guo, Hankun Wang, Yifan Yang, Zhikang Niu, Shuai Wang, Hui Zhang, Xie Chen, and Kai Yu. 2024{\natexlab{b}}.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:267212218} {Vall-t: Decoder-only generative transducer for robust and decoding-controllable text-to-speech}.
21. Hugo~Flores Garcia, Prem Seetharaman, Rithesh Kumar, and Bryan Pardo. 2023.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:259501208} {Vampnet: Music generation via masked acoustic token modeling}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2307.04686.
22. Zhifang Guo, Yichong Leng, Yihan Wu, Sheng Zhao, and Xuejiao Tan. 2022.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:253761189} {Prompttts: Controllable text-to-speech with text descriptions}.
    \newblock \emph{ICASSP 2023 - 2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 1--5.
23. Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li~Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. 2020.
    \newblock \href {https://openreview.net/forum?id=rygGQyrFvH} {The curious case of neural text degeneration}.
    \newblock In \emph{International Conference on Learning Representations}.
24. Wei{-}Ning Hsu, David Harwath, Tyler Miller, Christopher Song, and James~R. Glass. 2021.
    \newblock Text-free image-to-speech synthesis using learned segmental units.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, {ACL/IJCNLP} 2021}.
25. Keith Ito and Linda Johnson. 2017.
    \newblock The lj speech dataset.
    \newblock \url{https://keithito.com/LJ-Speech-Dataset/}.
26. Shengpeng Ji, Jia li~Zuo, Minghui Fang, Ziyue Jiang, Feiyang Chen, Xinyu Duan, Baoxing Huai, and Zhou Zhao. 2023.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:261242529} {Textrolspeech: A text style control speech corpus with codec language text-to-speech models}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2308.14430.
27. Ziyue Jiang, Jinglin Liu, Yi~Ren, Jinzheng He, Zhenhui Ye, Shengpeng Ji, Qian Yang, Chen Zhang, Pengfei Wei, Chunfeng Wang, Xiang Yin, Zejun MA, and Zhou Zhao. 2024.
    \newblock \href {https://openreview.net/forum?id=mvMI3N4AvD} {Mega-{TTS} 2: Boosting prompting mechanisms for zero-shot speech synthesis}.
    \newblock In \emph{The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations}.
28. Ziyue Jiang, Yi~Ren, Zhe Ye, Jinglin Liu, Chen Zhang, Qiang Yang, Shengpeng Ji, Rongjie Huang, Chunfeng Wang, Xiang Yin, Zejun Ma, and Zhou Zhao. 2023{\natexlab{a}}.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:259088600} {Mega-tts: Zero-shot text-to-speech at scale with intrinsic inductive bias}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2306.03509.
29. Ziyue Jiang, Qiang Yang, Jia li~Zuo, Zhe Ye, Rongjie Huang, Yixiang Ren, and Zhou Zhao. 2023{\natexlab{b}}.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:258841652} {Fluentspeech: Stutter-oriented automatic speech editing with context-aware diffusion models}.
    \newblock In \emph{Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics}.
30. Zeyu Jin, Gautham~J. Mysore, Stephen DiVerdi, Jingwan Lu, and Adam Finkelstein. 2017.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:229279532} {Voco: text-based insertion and replacement in audio narration}.
    \newblock In \emph{International Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques}.
31. Eugene Kharitonov, Ann Lee, Adam Polyak, Yossi Adi, Jade Copet, Kushal Lakhotia, Tu~Nguyen, Morgane Rivi{\`e}re, Abdel rahman Mohamed, Emmanuel Dupoux, and Wei-Ning Hsu. 2021{\natexlab{a}}.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:237439400} {Text-free prosody-aware generative spoken language modeling}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2109.03264.
32. Eugene Kharitonov, Ann Lee, Adam Polyak, Yossi Adi, Jade Copet, Kushal Lakhotia, Tu~Nguyen, Morgane Rivi{\`e}re, Abdel rahman Mohamed, Emmanuel Dupoux, and Wei-Ning Hsu. 2021{\natexlab{b}}.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:237439400} {Text-free prosody-aware generative spoken language modeling}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2109.03264.
33. Eugene Kharitonov, Damien Vincent, Zal{\'a}n Borsos, Rapha{\"e}l Marinier, Sertan Girgin, Olivier Pietquin, Matthew Sharifi, Marco Tagliasacchi, and Neil Zeghidour. 2023.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:256627687} {Speak, read and prompt: High-fidelity text-to-speech with minimal supervision}.
    \newblock \emph{Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics}, 11:1703--1718.
34. Jaehyeon Kim, Jungil Kong, and Juhee Son. 2021.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:235417304} {Conditional variational autoencoder with adversarial learning for end-to-end text-to-speech}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2106.06103.
35. Diederik~P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2014.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:6628106} {Adam: A method for stochastic optimization}.
    \newblock \emph{CoRR}, abs/1412.6980.
36. Jungil Kong, Jaehyeon Kim, and Jaekyoung Bae. 2020.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:222291664} {Hifi-gan: Generative adversarial networks for efficient and high fidelity speech synthesis}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2010.05646.
37. Felix Kreuk, Gabriel Synnaeve, Adam Polyak, Uriel Singer, Alexandre Defossez, Jade Copet, Devi Parikh, Yaniv Taigman, and Yossi Adi. 2022.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:252668761} {Audiogen: Textually guided audio generation}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2209.15352.
38. Robert~F. Kubichek. 1993.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:62230377} {Mel-cepstral distance measure for objective speech quality assessment}.
    \newblock \emph{Proceedings of IEEE Pacific Rim Conference on Communications Computers and Signal Processing}, 1:125--128 vol.1.
39. Kushal Lakhotia, Evgeny Kharitonov, Wei-Ning Hsu, Yossi Adi, Adam Polyak, Benjamin Bolte, Tu~Nguyen, Jade Copet, Alexei Baevski, Adel~Ben Mohamed, and Emmanuel Dupoux. 2021.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:231749922} {On generative spoken language modeling from raw audio}.
    \newblock \emph{Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics}, 9:1336--1354.
40. Matt Le, Apoorv Vyas, Bowen Shi, Brian Karrer, Leda Sari, Rashel Moritz, Mary Williamson, Vimal Manohar, Yossi Adi, Jay Mahadeokar, and Wei-Ning Hsu. 2023.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:259275061} {Voicebox: Text-guided multilingual universal speech generation at scale}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2306.15687.
41. Feiteng Li. 2023.
    \newblock An unofficial pytorch implementation of vall-e.
    \newblock \url{https://github.com/lifeiteng/vall-e}.
42. Guanghou Liu, Yongmao Zhang, Yinjiao Lei, Yunlin Chen, Rui Wang, Zhifei Li, and Linfu Xie. 2023.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:258987676} {Promptstyle: Controllable style transfer for text-to-speech with natural language descriptions}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2305.19522.
43. Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. 2017.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:53592270} {Decoupled weight decay regularization}.
    \newblock In \emph{International Conference on Learning Representations}.
44. Daniel Lyth and Simon King. 2024.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:267412845} {Natural language guidance of high-fidelity text-to-speech with synthetic annotations}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2402.01912.
45. Matthias Mauch and Simon Dixon. 2014.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:3287290} {Pyin: A fundamental frequency estimator using probabilistic threshold distributions}.
    \newblock \emph{2014 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 659--663.
46. Brian McFee, Colin Raffel, Dawen Liang, Daniel P.~W. Ellis, Matt McVicar, Eric Battenberg, and Oriol Nieto. 2015.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:33504} {librosa: Audio and music signal analysis in python}.
    \newblock In \emph{SciPy}.
47. Max Morrison, Lucas Rencker, Zeyu Jin, Nicholas~J. Bryan, Juan~Pablo C{\'a}ceres, and Bryan Pardo. 2021.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:231933705} {Context-aware prosody correction for text-based speech editing}.
    \newblock \emph{ICASSP 2021 - 2021 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 7038--7042.
48. Tu~Nguyen, Eugene Kharitonov, Jade Copet, Yossi Adi, Wei-Ning Hsu, Ali~Mamdouh Elkahky, Paden Tomasello, Robin Algayres, Beno{\^i}t Sagot, Abdel rahman Mohamed, and Emmanuel Dupoux. 2022.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:247792843} {Generative spoken dialogue language modeling}.
    \newblock \emph{Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics}, 11:250--266.
49. Alec Radford, Jong~Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine McLeavey, and Ilya Sutskever. 2022.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:252923993} {Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2212.04356.
50. Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. 2019.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:160025533} {Language models are unsupervised multitask learners}.
51. Robin~San Roman, Pierre Fernandez, Alexandre Defossez, Teddy Furon, Tuan Tran, and Hady ElSahar. 2024.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:267320270} {Proactive detection of voice cloning with localized watermarking}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2401.17264.
52. Yakun Song, Zhuo Chen, Xiaofei Wang, Ziyang Ma, and Xie Chen. 2024.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:266999714} {Ella-v: Stable neural codec language modeling with alignment-guided sequence reordering}.
53. Daxin Tan, Liqun Deng, Yu~Ting Yeung, Xin Jiang, Xiao Chen, and Tan Lee. 2021.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:235731565} {Editspeech: A text based speech editing system using partial inference and bidirectional fusion}.
    \newblock \emph{2021 IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding Workshop (ASRU)}, pages 626--633.
54. A{\"a}ron van~den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. 2017.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:20282961} {Neural discrete representation learning}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/1711.00937.
55. Ashish Vaswani, Noam~M. Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan~N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:13756489} {Attention is all you need}.
    \newblock In \emph{Neural Information Processing Systems}.
56. Chengyi Wang, Sanyuan Chen, Yu~Wu, Zi-Hua Zhang, Long Zhou, Shujie Liu, Zhuo Chen, Yanqing Liu, Huaming Wang, Jinyu Li, Lei He, Sheng Zhao, and Furu Wei. 2023{\natexlab{a}}.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:255440307} {Neural codec language models are zero-shot text to speech synthesizers}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2301.02111.
57. Tao Wang, Jiangyan Yi, Liqun Deng, Ruibo Fu, Jianhua Tao, and Zhengqi Wen. 2022.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:249436751} {Context-aware mask prediction network for end-to-end text-based speech editing}.
    \newblock \emph{ICASSP 2022 - 2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 6082--6086.
58. Tianrui Wang, Long Zhou, Zi-Hua Zhang, Yu~Wu, Shujie Liu, Yashesh Gaur, Zhuo Chen, Jinyu Li, and Furu Wei. 2023{\natexlab{b}}.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:258888211} {Viola: Unified codec language models for speech recognition, synthesis, and translation}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2305.16107.
59. Xiaofei Wang, Manthan Thakker, Zhuo Chen, Naoyuki Kanda, Sefik~Emre Eskimez, Sanyuan Chen, Min Tang, Shujie Liu, Jinyu Li, and Takuya Yoshioka. 2023{\natexlab{c}}.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:260887708} {Speechx: Neural codec language model as a versatile speech transformer}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2308.06873.
60. Junichi Yamagishi, Christophe Veaux, and Kirsten MacDonald. 2019.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:213060286} {Cstr vctk corpus: English multi-speaker corpus for cstr voice cloning toolkit (version 0.92)}.
61. Junichi Yamagishi, Xin Wang, Massimiliano Todisco, Md. Sahidullah, Jose Patino, Andreas Nautsch, Xuechen Liu, Kong-Aik Lee, Tomi~H. Kinnunen, Nicholas W.~D. Evans, and H{\'e}ctor Delgado. 2021.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:237385791} {Asvspoof 2021: accelerating progress in spoofed and deepfake speech detection}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2109.00537.
62. Dongchao Yang, Songxiang Liu, Rongjie Huang, Guangzhi Lei, Chao Weng, Helen~M. Meng, and Dong Yu. 2023.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:256416291} {Instructtts: Modelling expressive tts in discrete latent space with natural language style prompt}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2301.13662.
63. Zengwei Yao, Liyong Guo, Xiaoyu Yang, Wei Kang, Fangjun Kuang, Yifan Yang, Zengrui Jin, Long Lin, and Daniel Povey. 2024.
    \newblock \href {https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.11230.pdf} {Zipformer: A faster and better encoder for automatic speech recognition}.
    \newblock In \emph{ICLR}.
64. Dacheng Yin, Chuanxin Tang, Yanqing Liu, Xiaoqiang Wang, Zhiyuan Zhao, Yucheng Zhao, Zhiwei Xiong, Sheng Zhao, and Chong Luo. 2022.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:250088771} {Retrievertts: Modeling decomposed factors for text-based speech insertion}.
    \newblock In \emph{Interspeech}.
65. Neil Zeghidour, Alejandro Luebs, Ahmed Omran, Jan Skoglund, and Marco Tagliasacchi. 2021.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:236149944} {Soundstream: An end-to-end neural audio codec}.
    \newblock \emph{IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing}, 30:495--507.
66. Heiga Zen, Viet-Trung Dang, Robert A.~J. Clark, Yu~Zhang, Ron~J. Weiss, Ye~Jia, Z.~Chen, and Yonghui Wu. 2019.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:102352475} {Libritts: A corpus derived from librispeech for text-to-speech}.
    \newblock In \emph{Interspeech}.
67. You Zhang, Fei Jiang, and Zhiyao Duan. 2020.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:235077416} {One-class learning towards synthetic voice spoofing detection}.
    \newblock \emph{IEEE Signal Processing Letters}, 28:937--941.
68. Zi-Hua Zhang, Long Zhou, Chengyi Wang, Sanyuan Chen, Yu~Wu, Shujie Liu, Zhuo Chen, Yanqing Liu, Huaming Wang, Jinyu Li, Lei He, Sheng Zhao, and Furu Wei. 2023.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:257378493} {Speak foreign languages with your own voice: Cross-lingual neural codec language modeling}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2303.03926.
