---
arxiv_id: '2406.11427'
title: 'DiTTo-TTS: Efficient and Scalable Zero-Shot Text-to-Speech with Diffusion
  Transformer'
authors:
- Keon Lee et.al.
submitted: '2024-06-17'
categories: []
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.11427
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 16/96
citations_resolved_at: '2026-07-07T16:14:18+00:00'
references_parsed: 96
arxiv_version: ''
---

# Appendix

## Related Work

<div class="keoniclr">

#### Discussion on Seed-TTS

Seed-TTS , particularly its variant Seed-TTS<sub>DiT</sub>, demonstrates that fully diffusion-based models achieve superior performance without relying on domain-specific factors such as phonemes or phoneme-level durations. By providing only the total duration for the diffusion model, Seed-TTS<sub>DiT</sub> removes the need for precise phoneme durations, enabling the DiT architecture to flexibly learn fine-grained durations. This approach illustrates that high-quality speech synthesis is achievable without detailed phoneme-level information. While Seed-TTS highlights the potential of simple modeling approaches in TTS, it does not offer a comprehensive comparison with diverse baselines and explore the critical factors enabling LDMs to succeed without domain-specific factors—both of which are the central focus of our study. We specifically address two key research questions, as discussed in Section <a href="#sec:experimental_results" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:experimental_results">[sec:experimental_results]</a>: *RQ1*—Can LDMs achieve state-of-the-art performance in text-to-speech tasks at scale without relying on domain-specific factors, similar to their successes in other domains? *RQ2*—If so, what are the primary factors that enable their success? Our study systematically addresses these questions through extensive empirical investigations. We demonstrate that LDM-based TTS, even without domain-specific factors, achieves performance that is superior or comparable to state-of-the-art autoregressive (AR) and non-autoregressive (Non-AR) TTS baselines, enabling a fair evaluation of its capabilities within the broader research landscape. Furthermore, we identify the key factors driving this success and provide practical insights into a new modeling paradigm for TTS systems. Notable contributions include methodological advancements such as the semantic injection of Mel-VAE++, a speech length predictor, and architectural ablations involving a long skip connection, offering actionable guidance for optimizing the promising modeling paradigm.

</div>

#### Large-scale TTS

Recently, large-scale TTS research progresses actively in two main directions: LLM-based autoregressive (AR) TTS and non-autoregressive (Non-AR) TTS. A prominent feature of LLMs is the scalability and their proficiency in zero-shot learning tasks, demonstrating significant capabilities without prior specific training on those tasks . Efforts to replicate LLM’s capability in different modalities have shown progress, including vision and audio . VALL-E employs EnCodec for speech-to-token mapping, posing TTS tasks as AR language modeling tasks, thus enabling zero-shot capabilities in the speech domain. CLaM-TTS introduces Mel-VAE to achieve superior token length compression, and enables a language model to predict multiple tokens simultaneously. Although this approach removes the need for cascaded modeling to manage the number of token streams, their resource-intensive inference processes limit their applications . On the other hand, Non-AR generative models are employed to enhance the efficiency of TTS systems. Voicebox utilizes a flow matching to generate speech, effectively casting the TTS task into a speech infilling task. NaturalSpeech series , building upon recent advances in the Latent Diffusion Model (LDM) , incorporate auxiliary modules for controllability of various speech attribute such as content, prosody, and timbre. However, requiring supplementary data beyond speech-transcription pairs scalability.

#### Neural Audio Codec

Neural audio codecs, which effectively compress various types of audio using neural networks, are used as part of many TTS systems . Recent advancements employ an encoder-decoder architecture coupled with Residual Vector Quantization (RVQ) to transform raw audio waves into discretized tokens. For example, EnCodec converts 24,000 Hz mono waveforms into 75 Hz latents. With a similar architecture, by focusing the compression specifically on speech rather than general audio signals, Mel-VAE achieves approximately 10.76 Hz latents by compressing the mel-spectrogram. This reduction significantly lowers the computational cost of the speech generation module. Another research direction of improving neural audio codecs for TTS systems is injecting semantic information using large language models (LLMs) .

## Dataset Details

**English** We use the following datasets: (1) Multilingual LibriSpeech (MLS) , which comprises transcribed speech from multiple speakers and languages, sourced from LibriVox audiobooks. (2) GigaSpeech , containing multi-domain speeches, such as audiobooks, podcasts, and YouTube videos, with human transcriptions. This dataset includes audio from multiple speakers but lacks speaker information. (3) LibriTTS-R , a restored version of the LibriTTS corpus, sharing the same metadata. (4) VCTK and (5) LJSpeech , which are widely used English datasets in the speech synthesis community, with VCTK being multi-speaker and LJSpeech being single-speaker. Additionally, we include the (6) Expresso Dataset in DiTTo-en training. This high-quality (48,000 Hz) expressive speech collection features read speech and improvised dialogues from four speakers, totaling 40 hours.

We train a speech length predictor for DiTTo-en using the same datasets, but also include the LibriSpeech dataset. This is due to the dependency on text normalization. MLS datasets consist of audio recordings, each ranging from about 10 to 20 seconds in length, paired with normalized text. It affects the speech length predictor, making it output lengths based on whether the input text is normalized. For example, if we input normalized text, the model tends to predict its speech length in the same range as MLS. While the text in LibriSpeech is also normalized, it offers more varied speech lengths, thus reducing the dependency on text normalization when determining speech lengths.

**Korean** We use the following datasets: (1) AIHub 14[^1], which features recordings of everyday people reading provided script sentences. (2) AIHub 15[^2], which has recordings of 50 professional voice actors expressing seven emotions (joy, surprised, sad, angry, scared, hate, neutral), five speaking styles (narrating, reading, news-like, dialogic, broadcasting), and three vocal ages (kid, young, old). (3) KsponSpeech , which consists of 2,000 speakers, each recording individual free speech on various topics in a quiet environment. The transcription follows specific guidelines regarding laughter, breathing, and more. (4) AIHub-broadcast[^3], which is designed for speech recognition and includes 10,000 hours of multi-speaker conversations recorded at 16,000 Hz, covering a wide range of 22 categories without annotations for speaker identity or emotional state. We also include 5) AIHub-expressive[^4], a dataset designed for speech synthesis, comprising 1,000 hours of speech recorded at 44,100 Hz. This dataset features 89 speakers and includes 7 speech styles (monologue, dialogue, storytelling, broadcast, friendly, animation, and reading) and 4 emotional tones (happiness, sadness, anger, and neutral).

**Other Language** We use subsets of MLS including German, Dutch, French, Spanish, Italian, Portuguese, and Polish.

**Dataset Preprocessing** Audio stream and its metadata are preprocessed and stored into parquet format. This allows fetching data with minimal IO-overhead from Network Attached Storage, allowing faster training. Parquets consisting of 10K pairs of audio and its metadata are compressed into TAR format, which further compresses to minimize data read overhead. While training, TAR files are decompressed, and parquets are deserialized into audio streams and its corresponding metadata in json format.

## Experimental Setup Details

For English-only evaluations, we transcript generated audio using the CTC-based HuBERT-Large model[^5] . For Multilingual Evaluations, we utilize OpenAI’s Whisper model[^6] . Text normalization is conducted using NVIDIA’s NeMo-text-processing[^7] . In both evaluations, WavLM-TDCNN[^8] is employed to evaluate SIM-o and SIM-r .

We conduct subjective evaluations using Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) with US-based evaluators. For SMOS, evaluators assess the likeness of samples to the provided speech prompts, considering speaker similarity, style, acoustics, and background disturbances. In CMOS, evaluators compare the overall quality of a synthesized sample to a reference. They use a given scale to judge whether the synthesized version is superior or inferior to the reference. SMOS employs a 1 to 5 integer scale, where 5 signifies top quality. CMOS uses a scale from -3 (indicating the synthesized speech is much worse than the reference) to 3 (indicating it’s much better), with 1-unit intervals. Samples receive 6 and 12 ratings for SMOS and CMOS, respectively.

<div class="keonlee">

Figure <a href="#fig:inst_smos_full" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:inst_smos_full">[fig:inst_smos_full]</a> presents the instructions given to the evaluators for the SMOS study, while Figure <a href="#fig:inst_cmos_full" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:inst_cmos_full">[fig:inst_cmos_full]</a> presents the instructions for the CMOS study.

</div>

## Baseline Details

The followings are the details of the baselines we used to compare with our model:

- VALL-E : A zero-shot TTS model integrates autoregressive and non-autoregressive models. We show the objective metric scores directly extracted from the paper. We also present subjective evaluation results by comparing our samples with demo samples, which are at sample rates of 22,050 Hz and 16,000 Hz, respectively.

- SPEAR-TTS : A multi-speaker TTS model that treats TTS as a two-step sequence-to-sequence process. It first converts text into high-level semantic tokens, similar to "reading," and then transforms these semantic tokens into low-level acoustic tokens, akin to "speaking." We present the objective metric scores directly from the paper.

- CLaM-TTS : An advanced neural codec language model that uses probabilistic residual vector quantization to compress token length, enabling the simultaneous generation of multiple tokens, in contrast to VALL-E’s cascaded modeling approach. We offer both objective and subjective comparisons between our samples and those generated from the official model checkpoints.

- YourTTS : A conventional TTS model based on the VITS framework for zero-shot multi-speaker and multilingual training. We show both objective and subjective comparisons between our samples and those generated from the model checkpoints. We use the official checkpoint [^9].

- Voicebox : A generative model employs a non-autoregressive flow-based architecture to tackle TTS as a text-guided speech infilling task, utilizing a large dataset. We present the objective metric scores directly from the paper. Additionally, we provide subjective evaluation results by comparing our samples with demo samples, recorded at sample rates of 22,050 Hz and 16,000 Hz, respectively.

- Simple-TTS : A Latent Diffusion Model (LDM) based on U-ViT serves as an alternative to complex TTS synthesis pipelines, removing the need for phonemizers, forced aligners, or detailed multi-stage processes. We provide both objective and subjective comparisons between our samples and those generated from the model checkpoints. We use the official checkpoint [^10].

- NaturalSpeech 2 : A non-autoregressive TTS system that incorporates a neural audio codec employing residual vector quantizers to obtain quantized latent vectors. These vectors serve as input for a diffusion model, which generates continuous latent vectors conditioned on text input. Additionally, the system employs a speech prompting mechanism along with duration and pitch predictors. We present subjective evaluation results by comparing our samples with demo samples, which are at sample rates of 22,050 Hz and 16,000 Hz, respectively.

- NaturalSpeech 3 : A non-autoregressive TTS system with factorized diffusion models based on a factorized vector quantization (FVQ) to disentangle speech waveforms into distinct subspaces such as content, prosody, timbre, and acoustic details. We present subjective evaluation results by comparing our samples with demo samples, which are at sample rates of 22,050 Hz and 16,000 Hz, respectively.

- Mega-TTS : A TTS system that decomposes speech into attributes like content, timbre, prosody, and phase, with each attribute modeled by a module using appropriate inductive biases. We show subjective evaluation results by comparing our samples with demo samples, which have sample rates of 22,050 Hz and 16,000 Hz, respectively.

- E3 TTS : A simple and efficient diffusion based TTS model which takes plain text as input. Unlike previous work, it doesn’t rely on intermediary representations like spectrogram features or alignment data. We present subjective evaluation results by comparing our samples with demo samples, which are at sample rates of 22,050 Hz and 24,000 Hz, respectively.

## Model Configuration

<div class="keonlee">

**Mel-VAE**: We utilized the pretrained Mel-VAE, which was obtained through collaboration with the authors of CLaM-TTS . Our preference for Mel-VAE over neural audio codes such as EnCodec is based on the observation that latent audio representations closely related to text yield better performance in TTS. We illustrate the autoencoding process of Mel-VAE as follows: The encoder maps a mel-spectrogram into a sequence of latent representations $`z_{1:T}`$, which are then processed by a residual vector quantizer $`\text{RQ}_{\psi}(\cdot)`$. This quantizer converts each latent vector $`z_t`$ at time $`t`$ into a quantized embedding $`\hat{z}_{t} = \sum_{d=1}^{D} e_\psi(c_{t,d};d)`$. Each embedding at depth $`d`$, $`e_\psi(c_{t,d};d)`$, is selected to minimize $`\| (z -\sum_{d'=1}^{d-1} e_\psi(c_{t,d'};d')) - e_\psi(c_{t,d};d)\|^{2}`$ among the codebook embeddings $`\{e_\psi(c',d)\}_{c'=1}^{V}`$, where the codebook size is $`V`$. The decoder then reconstructs the mel-spectrogram from the sequence of quantized latent representations $`\hat{z}_{1:T}`$.

**Model Configuration**:

</div>

Our architecture is based on DiT with several modifications. We extract text embeddings from a pre-trained text encoder, either from speechT5 or ByT5 , and use these embeddings as hidden states in cross-attention layers. Adaptive layer normalization (AdaLN) layers condition on both time and text embeddings. AdaLN outputs modulate the layers within each transformer block. We apply RoPE in self-attention layers. Following , we use a single global-AdaLN, sharing AdaLN parameters across all layers instead of using separate AdaLN for each layer. The global AdaLN layer conditions on both time and text, which are embedded and transformed with MLP layers. AdaLN generates scaling, shifting, and gating vectors for each self-attention, cross-attention, and MLP layer. Gating vectors modulate the outputs of each layer over the skip connections in transformer blocks. The vectors generated by AdaLN are further shifted with layer-independent learnable vectors. The MLP block in each transformer block adopts the gating mechanism from , which is used in the first linear layer of the MLP block. Inspired by , we insert a long skip connection from the input to the output of the last transformer block, differing from , where U-Net-like long skip connections are used between transformer blocks at opposing ends. The detailed configurations are shown in Table <a href="#tab:model_cfg_detail" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:model_cfg_detail">[tab:model_cfg_detail]</a>, and the parameters for the four different model sizes are listed in Table <a href="#tab:model_cfg_size" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:model_cfg_size">[tab:model_cfg_size]</a>.

<div class="keonlee">

## Noise Schedule and Classifier-Free Guidance

#### Noise Scheduler

We use the cosine noise schedule with scale-shift . Since the impact of noise schedules can vary depending on the resolution of the input, it may be necessary to shift the schedule to appropriately add noise across time steps. We test five different values of scale-shift and visualize them in Figure <a href="#fig:appendix_shift_scale_visualization" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:appendix_shift_scale_visualization">[fig:appendix_shift_scale_visualization]</a>.

#### Classfier-Free Guidance

To leverage classifier-free guidance for its efficacy in diffusion-based generative modeling, we train both a conditional and an unconditional diffusion model simultaneously. This is achieved by omitting the text input with a probability of $`p = 0.1`$. In the cross-attention layers of DiTTo, we concatenate a learnable null embedding with the text features along the sequence dimension, following the approach of . We eliminate the conditioning information by masking out the text embeddings during the cross-attention computation and setting the mean-pooled text embedding to zero.

</div>

#### Hyperparameter Search for Noise Schedule and Sampling

We conduct a hyperparameter search for three components regarding noise schedule and sampling: (a) the scale-shift of the noise scheduler by training five different models with scales ranging from 0.1 to 0.5 (Figure <a href="#fig:ab_noise_scale_search" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:ab_noise_scale_search">[fig:ab_noise_scale_search]</a>) as visualized in Figure <a href="#fig:appendix_shift_scale_visualization" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:appendix_shift_scale_visualization">[fig:appendix_shift_scale_visualization]</a>, (b) the classifier-free guidance (CFG) scale during inference (Figure <a href="#fig:ab_cfg_scale_search" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:ab_cfg_scale_search">[fig:ab_cfg_scale_search]</a>), and (c) the number of diffusion steps during inference (Figure <a href="#fig:ab_diffusion_step_search" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:ab_diffusion_step_search">[fig:ab_diffusion_step_search]</a>). In these figures, The blue *dashed* line with circle marker represents the <span style="color: 0,0,1">WER</span>, and the green *dotted* line with square marker represents the <span style="color: 0,0.502,0">SIM-r</span>. The selected values in each experiment are marked with vertical black dash-dot lines. Notably, 25 diffusion steps are sufficient to produce high-fidelity outputs, and we observe that performance gaps among different steps diminish with further training.

## Training and Inference of Speech Length Predictor

#### Training

We train two speech length predictors for DiTTo-en and DiTTo-multi. Each was trained using the same text encoder as the respective DiTTo models. Essentially, we followed the same configuration as mentioned above, but without gradient accumulation and with a maximum token size of 10,240 for 600K steps. The number of trainable parameters for the speech length predictors is 33.18M for DiTTo-en and 33.58M for DiTTo-multi. Figure <a href="#fig:appendix_len_pred_training" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:appendix_len_pred_training">[fig:appendix_len_pred_training]</a> presents a visualization of length sampling during training.

#### Inference

After training the speech length predictor,

<div class="keoniclr">

The speech length predictor is trained with causal masking to determine the total length based solely on a given speech prompt. During inference, however, it operates in a single forward pass, making it non-autoregressive. This design enables the predictor to learn the remaining lengths for all positions simultaneously, improving training efficiency and eliminating constraints on prompt length.

</div>

<div class="keonlee">

## Comparison with Open-Source Models

We conducted an English-only *cross-sentence* task on StyleTTS 2 and XTTS-v2 , with the results shown in Table <a href="#tab:en_cross_open_source_models" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:en_cross_open_source_models">[tab:en_cross_open_source_models]</a>. Our model significantly outperformed StyleTTS 2 in SIM-o, despite StyleTTS 2 having slightly higher WER and CER due to its use of phonemes and phoneme-level duration. XTTS-v2 also did not perform as well as DiTTo-en-S. These results underscore the favorable performance of our models compared to the others.

</div>

## Human Evaluations on Comparison of Demo Samples

Table <a href="#tab:en_mos_demo" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:en_mos_demo">[tab:en_mos_demo]</a> shows the results of human evaluation on demo cases. DiTTo outperforms all others except for NaturalSpeech 3 in SMOS and Voicebox in CMOS. We hypothesize that the prompts used in Voicebox tends to be unintelligible and noisy, and as shown in SMOS, the model samples did not adhere to them well. In contrast, DiTTo follows the prompts better, although the naturalness of the samples themselves is somewhat lacking. Therefore, in CMOS, when comparing two samples without prompts, it is likely that DiTTo will be judged as less natural. Conversely, in NaturalSpeech 3, as shown in SMOS, the model follows the intonation of the prompts too closely, sometimes resulting in unnaturalness. Thus, when comparing samples without prompts, DiTTo may sound more natural.

<div class="keonlee">

## Human Evaluations on Comparison with Concurrent Works

We conduct an English-only *cross-sentence* task using SimpleSpeech and E2 TTS , with the results shown in Table <a href="#tab:mos_on_concurrent_works" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:mos_on_concurrent_works">[tab:mos_on_concurrent_works]</a>, where all samples are at 16,000 Hz. Our model demonstrates favorable performance in all cases, except for the SMOS score of E2 TTS.

## Human Evaluations on Comparison of Out-of-Domain RAVDESS Demo Samples

For the RAVDESS evaluation, we use NaturalSpeech 3 demo samples at 16,000 Hz and measure CMOS and SMOS, as shown in Table <a href="#tab:en_mos_demo" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:en_mos_demo">[tab:en_mos_demo]</a>, with our model’s output downsampled to 16,000 Hz. Table <a href="#tab:mos_on_ravdess_benchmark" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:mos_on_ravdess_benchmark">[tab:mos_on_ravdess_benchmark]</a> and Table <a href="#tab:mos_on_ravdess_zs_emo" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:mos_on_ravdess_zs_emo">[tab:mos_on_ravdess_zs_emo]</a> present results from the "Comparison Results on RAVDESS Benchmark" and "Zero-Shot TTS Samples (Emotion)" sections of the NaturalSpeech 3 demo page[^11], respectively. In the RAVDESS benchmark, our model outperforms all baselines and demonstrates MOS scores comparable to NaturalSpeech 3, along with superior CMOS performance in additional zero-shot emotion settings. This trend is consistent with the results shown in Table <a href="#tab:en_mos_demo" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:en_mos_demo">[tab:en_mos_demo]</a>, and we interpret these findings similarly to our previous experiments. These results indicate the strong performance of DiTTo, even with out-of-domain audio prompts.

</div>

## Multiligual Continuation Task

In this section, we provide the experimental results of multilingual continual tasks for both DiTTo-multi in Table <a href="#tab:results_multi_cont" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:results_multi_cont">[tab:results_multi_cont]</a> and CLaM-multi in Table <a href="#tab:results_multi_cont_clam" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:results_multi_cont_clam">[tab:results_multi_cont_clam]</a>.

<div class="keonlee">

## Scaling Data

For the two experiments, we construct each data subset as follows: 0.5K from LibriTTS only, 5.5K from LibriTTS and MLS English subset 5K, 10.5K from LibriTTS and MLS English subset 10K, and 50.5K from LibriTTS and MLS English subset 50k, in hours. The evaluation is conducted on the English-only *cross-sentence* task. To ensure fast convergence of Mel-VAE, we replace the commitment loss with the original RVQ , as used in other audio codecs , where the commitment loss is calculated at each depth. We also measure PESQ and ViSQOL for different Mel-VAEs. Please refer to Appendix <a href="#sec:appendix_experimental_setup" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:appendix_experimental_setup">1.3</a> for metric details.

The first experimental results are presented in Table <a href="#tab:data_scaling_fixed_melvae" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:data_scaling_fixed_melvae">[tab:data_scaling_fixed_melvae]</a>, showing that: (1) Even with the 0.5K dataset, the model exhibits acceptable speech accuracy (WER=3.30) and speaker similarity to the prompt (SIM-r=0.5782). At 5.5K, there is an improvement in speech accuracy (WER=3.14). (2) Beyond 5.5K, further increases in dataset size result in further improvements, with speaker similarity showing similar scores or incremental gains. (3) We observe that models trained on smaller datasets like 0.5K show lower speech accuracy compared to phoneme-level duration-based models such as P-Flow . This is one of the limitations of our model.

Table <a href="#tab:data_scaling_trained_melvae" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:data_scaling_trained_melvae">[tab:data_scaling_trained_melvae]</a> presents the second experimental results. Compared to the first experiment, performance drops with a smaller dataset, especially at 0.5K, even though Codec PESQ and ViSQOL scores improve compared to larger datasets. As the dataset size increases, the benefits of data scaling become more apparent, particularly in terms of WER. This pattern aligns with the data scaling results in NaturalSpeech 3 .

<div class="keoniclr">

We further evaluate our model under more restricted conditions, using a dataset as limited as the 60 hours used by Voicebox in Section B.2 . Specifically, we train a DiTTo variant on approximately 50 hours of data by randomly sampling 10% of the LibriTTS dataset, following the same experimental settings as the first experiment in Table <a href="#tab:data_scaling_fixed_melvae" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:data_scaling_fixed_melvae">[tab:data_scaling_fixed_melvae]</a>. However, due to the limited data, we encounter overfitting and apply early stopping at 40K steps (instead of the planned 200K steps). At this point, the model achieves a WER of 9.25 and a SIM-r of 0.3336. Although these results do not allow for a direct comparison with Voicebox’s corresponding setting due to overfitting, we believe that incorporating phoneme-level durations during training, as done in Voicebox, ensures greater robustness when working with small datasets.

</div>

## Speech Length Modeling Comparison

For evaluation, the test set is composed of five randomly selected samples per speaker from 42 speakers in the test set of the MLS English subset. The results in Table <a href="#tab:appendix_slp_comp" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:appendix_slp_comp">[tab:appendix_slp_comp]</a> show how variable length modeling in diffusion models (referred to as *SLP-CE* and *SLP-Regression*) for TTS enhances performance compared to fixed length modelings (referred to as *fixed-length-full* and *fixed-length*). *fixed-length* includes only a portion of the padding in the loss, similar to Simple-TTS , while *fixed-length-full* includes the entire padding. We observed that as the proportion of padding included increases, performance decreases. The key point is that excluding padding in variable length modeling is essential for improving the performance of diffusion models, rather than including padding in the target distribution as in existing fixed length modeling approaches.

</div>

## Mel-VAE++

When Mel-VAE is finetuned with the guidance of a pre-trained language model, consistent improvement in performance is observed, closing the gap with the SpeechT5 encoder, which is trained on both unsupervised speech and language data. To improve our understanding of semantic content injection, we finetune Mel-VAE with various pre-trained text and speech encoder models. As shown in Table <a href="#tab:appendix_ab_melvae_pp" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:appendix_ab_melvae_pp">[tab:appendix_ab_melvae_pp]</a>, the experiments use various combinations of DiTTo text encoders and Mel-VAE text encoders. When SpeechT5 is utilized as the text encoder for DiTTo, semantic content injection enhances the performance metrics; however, its gains, while positive, are not as substantial as those observed in the control, which is trained the same number of steps without auxiliary signal, denoted as ‘-’. When ByT5-base is used as the DiTTo text encoder, using ByT5-base as Mel-VAE semantic content injection model significantly boosts metrics. We additionally observe that HuBERT feature matching, as done in , helps refine its speech quality, as can be seen in the improved Speaker Similarity (SIM) metrics. When ByT5-base and HuBERT are both used, Mel-VAE benefits from both models.

We also investigate how DiTTo interacts with the text encoder latents as training progresses, in settings with and without semantic content injection. Since the TTS process typically ensures a monotonic alignment between text and speech, the diagonality of cross-attention between the text encoder and DiT block indicates how effectively text latents are used during denoising process. The intensity of the cross-attention map reflects how conducive the information provided by the text encoder is to producing DiTTo’s output. We measure the monotonicity of cross-attention maps using Cumulative Attention Diagonality (CAD) .

The median CAD values are drawn in solid lines as in Figure <a href="#fig:ab_cad" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:ab_cad">[fig:ab_cad]</a>. The model performs inference on 5 samples. The Interquartile Range (IQR) is represented by the shaded regions surrounding the solid lines in the graph. We set the sampling steps as 25, noise schedule scale shift as 0.3, and classifier-free guidance scale as 5.0. Given that the parameters of text encoders are not tuned during DiTTo training, drastic changes in CAD values across training steps without semantic content injection indicate significant changes in DiTTo parameters are needed to align with text encoders. In contrast, with semantic content injection, changes in CAD values as training progresses show minimal fluctuation. This suggests that semantic content injection enables effective interaction between text encoders and DiT blocks. Based on CAD values across diffusion steps, semantic content injection allows the interaction between the text encoder and DiTTo to predominantly occur during the initial stages of the reverse process. This suggests that semantic content injection boosts the provision of rich semantic information by text encoders, allowing DiT blocks to focus on improving acoustic quality in later steps. Furthermore, the significant deviations across samples, as evidenced by the enlarged shaded regions when semantic injection is not employed, suggest that the interaction between the text encoder and DiT blocks is less effective without semantic content injection.

<div class="keonlee">

## Training Setup for Key Aspects Experiments

All models are trained for 200K steps using the MLS English subset in the base (B) configuration, with SpeechT5 as the text encoder and the original Mel-VAE as the audio latent codec. We adopt the same span masking strategy, utilize L1 loss, and limit the training data to 20 seconds, as described in . Other hyperparameters remain consistent with those used in DiTTo’s main training. The total training time is set to one day.

## Meaning of Latent Quantization in LDM-based TTS

We use the latent representation of Mel-VAE before quantization as the target latent for DiTTo. According to CLaM-TTS , probabilistic RVQ is the key factor that enables Mel-VAE to achieve significant length compression in the time domain compared to existing codecs. This allows Mel-VAE to generate an effective latent with a short sequence length while maintaining high-quality speech reconstruction. Quantization helps mitigate issues related to the KL loss weight coefficient during VAE training . In the audio domain, RVQ is preferred over VQ due to the higher sampling rates, as demonstrated in models like EnCodec and DAC . However, as we confirm through the experiments in Section <a href="#sec:ablation_study" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:ablation_study">[sec:ablation_study]</a>, quantization is crucial for generating a good latent representation within the autoencoder, but for an LDM like DiTTo, which uses these latents as a target, quantization itself is irrelevant.

</div>

<div class="keoniclr">

## Impact of Training Steps on Performance

We conduct two evaluations to investigate the impact of training steps on *cross-sentence* task performance. Table <a href="#tab:appendix_training_step_dynamics_1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:appendix_training_step_dynamics_1">[tab:appendix_training_step_dynamics_1]</a> presents the results of evaluating the performance of DiTTo-*mls* from Section <a href="#sec:main_results" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:main_results">[sec:main_results]</a> across different training steps. Specifically, we assess the model’s performance at 50K, 100K, 150K, and 200K training steps to analyze training dynamics. Our findings reveal that the DiTTo-*mls* model achieves reasonable WER and SIM performance as early as 100K steps.

## Trade-off between WER and SIM Performance in DiTTo-dac

DiTTo-*dac-24k* shows significantly worse WER performance but only slightly higher SIM-o compared to DiTTo-*mls*, as presented in Table <a href="#tab:ab_model_architecture" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:ab_model_architecture">[tab:ab_model_architecture]</a> in Section <a href="#sec:ablation_study" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:ablation_study">[sec:ablation_study]</a>. However, the trade-off trend observed in Figure <a href="#fig:ab_noise_scale_search" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:ab_noise_scale_search">[fig:ab_noise_scale_search]</a> suggests that optimizing WER inevitably results in a decline in SIM. This raises the question of whether DiTTo-*dac-24k* maintains better SIM-o performance than DiTTo-*mls*, even as WER improves. To investigate this, we conduct experiments by ablating scale-shift values of 0.1, 0.2, and 0.3 to optimize WER while monitoring changes in SIM (including evaluations for DiTTo-*dac-44k*). The results, summarized in Table <a href="#tab:appendix_tradeoff_wer_sim" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:appendix_tradeoff_wer_sim">[tab:appendix_tradeoff_wer_sim]</a>, confirm a clear trade-off between WER and SIM: reducing the scale-shift value improves WER but lowers SIM. For instance, decreasing the scale-shift value for DiTTo-*dac-24k* from 0.3 to 0.2 improves WER from 7.21 to 4.70, though still suboptimal, while SIM-o drops from 0.5478 to 0.5302. At a scale-shift value of 0.1, most diffusion timesteps become excessively noisy, negatively impacting both WER and SIM. Therefore, even after optimization, DiTTo-*dac-24k* does not surpass DiTTo-*mls* in either WER or SIM performance.

</div>

<div class="keonlee">

## Performance of Mel-VAE Variants with Different Compression Ratios

Table <a href="#tab:appendix_melvae8x" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:appendix_melvae8x">[tab:appendix_melvae8x]</a> presents the results of Mel-VAE variants with different compression ratios (2×, 4×, and 8×, as in the original Mel-VAE). We conclude that performance improves as the compression ratio increases (i.e., as the latent length decreases). We apply the same commitment loss modification described in Appendix <a href="#sec:appendix_data_scaling" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:appendix_data_scaling">1.13</a> for faster convergence.

</div>

<div class="keoniclr">

## Targeting Mel-Spectrograms Without Latent Modelings

We choose to use a latent representation from Mel-VAE instead of directly modeling mel-spectrograms because compact representations in the time domain improve diffusion model performance, particularly in intelligibility, as demonstrated by the WER results in Appendix <a href="#sec:appendix_melvae8x" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:appendix_melvae8x">1.20</a>. To support this, we conduct additional experiments comparing DiTTo-*mel* (trained directly on mel-spectrograms) with DiTTo-*encodec* and DiTTo-*mls* (trained on latent representations). The results in Table <a href="#tab:appendix_ditto_mel" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:appendix_ditto_mel">[tab:appendix_ditto_mel]</a> indicate that greater compression (DiTTo-*mls* $`>`$ DiTTo-*encodec* $`>`$ DiTTo-*mel*) improves WER performance by shortening the sequence length in the time domain, consistent with the findings in Appendix <a href="#sec:appendix_melvae8x" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:appendix_melvae8x">1.20</a>.

DiTTo-*mel* achieves the highest SIM-o score by directly predicting ground truth mel-spectrograms and avoiding the information loss typically introduced by autoencoder latent decoding. However, the overall performance of DiTTo-*mls* is comparable when considering both SIM-o and SIM-r together, while showing noticeably better intelligibility than DiTTo-*mel*. Both SMOS and CMOS subjective evaluations confirm that DiTTo-*mls* outperforms the other models, validating the objective results. The notably poor performance of DiTTo-*encodec* appears to stem from the relatively lower quality of the EnCodec . As shown in Table <a href="#tab:en_cont" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:en_cont">[tab:en_cont]</a> and Section <a href="#sec:main_results" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:main_results">[sec:main_results]</a>, DiTTo-*mls* also offers fast inference speeds and remains faster than Voicebox , which directly models mel-spectrograms, even with the same number of diffusion steps. This highlights the effectiveness of Mel-VAE as a target latent representation, balancing intelligibility, speech similarity, and efficiency.

</div>

[^1]: <https://www.aihub.or.kr/aihubdata/data/view.do?currMenu=115&topMenu=100&aihubDataSe=realm&dataSetSn=542>

[^2]: <https://www.aihub.or.kr/aihubdata/data/view.do?currMenu=115&topMenu=100&aihubDataSe=realm&dataSetSn=466>

[^3]: <https://www.aihub.or.kr/aihubdata/data/view.do?currMenu=115&topMenu=100&aihubDataSe=realm&dataSetSn=463>

[^4]: <https://www.aihub.or.kr/aihubdata/data/view.do?currMenu=115&topMenu=100&aihubDataSe=realm&dataSetSn=71349>

[^5]: <https://huggingface.co/facebook/hubert-large-ls960-ft>

[^6]: <https://github.com/openai/whisper/blob/main/model-card.md>: "large-v2"

[^7]: <https://github.com/NVIDIA/NeMo-text-processing>

[^8]: <https://github.com/microsoft/UniSpeech/tree/main/downstreams/speaker_verification>

[^9]: <https://github.com/Edresson/YourTTS>

[^10]: <https://github.com/asappresearch/simple-tts>

[^11]: <https://speechresearch.github.io/naturalspeech3/>

## References

1. Joshua Ainslie, James Lee-Thorp, Michiel de~Jong, Yury Zemlyanskiy, Federico Lebron, and Sumit Sanghai.
\newblock {GQA}: Training generalized multi-query transformer models from multi-head checkpoints.
\newblock In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), \emph{Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing}, pp.\  4895--4901, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics.
\newblock \doi{10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.298}.
\newblock URL \url{https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.298}.
2. Philip Anastassiou, Jiawei Chen, Jitong Chen, Yuanzhe Chen, Zhuo Chen, Ziyi Chen, Jian Cong, Lelai Deng, Chuang Ding, Lu~Gao, et~al.
\newblock Seed-tts: A family of high-quality versatile speech generation models.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.02430}, 2024. [arXiv:2406.02430](./2406.02430.md)
3. Junyi Ao, Rui Wang, Long Zhou, Chengyi Wang, Shuo Ren, Yu~Wu, Shujie Liu, Tom Ko, Qing Li, Yu~Zhang, et~al.
\newblock Speecht5: Unified-modal encoder-decoder pre-training for spoken language processing.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers)}, pp.\  5723--5738, 2022.
4. Evelina Bakhturina, Yang Zhang, and Boris Ginsburg.
\newblock {Shallow Fusion of Weighted Finite-State Transducer and Language Model for Text Normalization}.
\newblock In \emph{Interspeech}, 2022.
5. Jeong-Uk Bang, Seung Yun, Seung-Hi Kim, Mu-Yeol Choi, Min-Kyu Lee, Yeo-Jeong Kim, Dong-Hyun Kim, Jun Park, Young-Jik Lee, and Sang-Hun Kim.
\newblock Ksponspeech: Korean spontaneous speech corpus for automatic speech recognition.
\newblock \emph{Applied Sciences}, 10\penalty0 (19):\penalty0 6936, 2020.
6. Fan Bao, Shen Nie, Kaiwen Xue, Yue Cao, Chongxuan Li, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu.
\newblock All are worth words: A vit backbone for diffusion models.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pp.\  22669--22679. IEEE Computer Society, 2023.
7. Omer Bar-Tal, Hila Chefer, Omer Tov, Charles Herrmann, Roni Paiss, Shiran Zada, Ariel Ephrat, Junhwa Hur, Yuanzhen Li, Tomer Michaeli, et~al.
\newblock Lumiere: A space-time diffusion model for video generation.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.12945}, 2024. [arXiv:2401.12945](https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.12945)
8. Andreas Blattmann, Robin Rombach, Huan Ling, Tim Dockhorn, Seung~Wook Kim, Sanja Fidler, and Karsten Kreis.
\newblock Align your latents: High-resolution video synthesis with latent diffusion models.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pp.\  22563--22575, 2023.
9. Zalán Borsos, Raphaël Marinier, Damien Vincent, Eugene Kharitonov, Olivier Pietquin, Matt Sharifi, Dominik Roblek, Olivier Teboul, David Grangier, Marco Tagliasacchi, and Neil Zeghidour.
\newblock Audiolm: A language modeling approach to audio generation.
\newblock \emph{IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing}, 31:\penalty0 2523--2533, 2023.
\newblock \doi{10.1109/TASLP.2023.3288409}.
10. Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei~A Efros.
\newblock Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image editing instructions.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pp.\  18392--18402. IEEE, 2023.
11. Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared~D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei.
\newblock Language models are few-shot learners.
\newblock In H.~Larochelle, M.~Ranzato, R.~Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H.~Lin (eds.), \emph{Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)}, volume~33, pp.\  1877--1901. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.
\newblock URL \url{https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/file/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf}.
12. Edresson Casanova, Julian Weber, Christopher~D Shulby, Arnaldo~Candido Junior, Eren G{\"o}lge, and Moacir~A Ponti.
\newblock Yourtts: Towards zero-shot multi-speaker tts and zero-shot voice conversion for everyone.
\newblock In \emph{International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML)}, pp.\  2709--2720. PMLR, 2022.
13. Edresson Casanova, Kelly Davis, Eren G{\"o}lge, G{\"o}rkem G{\"o}knar, Iulian Gulea, Logan Hart, Aya Aljafari, Joshua Meyer, Reuben Morais, Samuel Olayemi, et~al.
\newblock Xtts: a massively multilingual zero-shot text-to-speech model.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04904}, 2024. [arXiv:2406.04904](./2406.04904.md)
14. Guoguo Chen, Shuzhou Chai, Guan-Bo Wang, Jiayu Du, Wei-Qiang Zhang, Chao Weng, Dan Su, Daniel Povey, Jan Trmal, Junbo Zhang, Mingjie Jin, Sanjeev Khudanpur, Shinji Watanabe, Shuaijiang Zhao, Wei Zou, Xiangang Li, Xuchen Yao, Yongqing Wang, Zhao You, and Zhiyong Yan.
\newblock {GigaSpeech: An Evolving, Multi-Domain ASR Corpus with 10,000 Hours of Transcribed Audio}.
\newblock In \emph{Interspeech}, pp.\  3670--3674, 2021.
\newblock \doi{10.21437/Interspeech.2021-1965}.
15. Junsong Chen, YU~Jincheng, GE~Chongjian, Lewei Yao, Enze Xie, Zhongdao Wang, James Kwok, Ping Luo, Huchuan Lu, and Zhenguo Li.
\newblock Pixart-$alpha$: Fast training of diffusion transformer for photorealistic text-to-image synthesis.
\newblock In \emph{International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)}, 2023{\natexlab{a}}.
16. Nanxin Chen, Yu~Zhang, Heiga Zen, Ron~J Weiss, Mohammad Norouzi, and William Chan.
\newblock Wavegrad: Estimating gradients for waveform generation.
\newblock In \emph{International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)}, 2020.
17. Sanyuan Chen, Chengyi Wang, Zhengyang Chen, Yu~Wu, Shujie Liu, Zhuo Chen, Jinyu Li, Naoyuki Kanda, Takuya Yoshioka, Xiong Xiao, et~al.
\newblock Wavlm: Large-scale self-supervised pre-training for full stack speech processing.
\newblock \emph{IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing}, 16\penalty0 (6):\penalty0 1505--1518, 2022.
18. Shoufa Chen, Mengmeng Xu, Jiawei Ren, Yuren Cong, Sen He, Yanping Xie, Animesh Sinha, Ping Luo, Tao Xiang, and Juan-Manuel Perez-Rua.
\newblock Gentron: Delving deep into diffusion transformers for image and video generation.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.04557}, 2023{\natexlab{b}}. [arXiv:2312.04557](https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.04557)
19. Shoufa Chen, Mengmeng Xu, Jiawei Ren, Yuren Cong, Sen He, Yanping Xie, Animesh Sinha, Ping Luo, Tao Xiang, and Juan-Manuel Perez-Rua.
\newblock Gentron: Diffusion transformers for image and video generation.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pp.\  6441--6451, June 2024.
20. Michael Chinen, Felicia~SC Lim, Jan Skoglund, Nikita Gureev, Feargus O'Gorman, and Andrew Hines.
\newblock Visqol v3: An open source production ready objective speech and audio metric.
\newblock In \emph{2020 twelfth international conference on quality of multimedia experience (QoMEX)}, pp.\  1--6. IEEE, 2020.
21. Yunfei Chu, Jin Xu, Xiaohuan Zhou, Qian Yang, Shiliang Zhang, Zhijie Yan, Chang Zhou, and Jingren Zhou.
\newblock Qwen-audio: Advancing universal audio understanding via unified large-scale audio-language models.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.07919}, 2023. [arXiv:2311.07919](https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.07919)
22. Alexandre D{\'e}fossez, Jade Copet, Gabriel Synnaeve, and Yossi Adi.
\newblock High fidelity neural audio compression.
\newblock \emph{Transactions on Machine Learning Research}, 2023.
23. Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol.
\newblock Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis.
\newblock \emph{Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)}, 34:\penalty0 8780--8794, 2021.
24. Sefik~Emre Eskimez, Xiaofei Wang, Manthan Thakker, Canrun Li, Chung-Hsien Tsai, Zhen Xiao, Hemin Yang, Zirun Zhu, Min Tang, Xu~Tan, et~al.
\newblock E2 tts: Embarrassingly easy fully non-autoregressive zero-shot tts.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.18009}, 2024. [arXiv:2406.18009](./2406.18009.md)
25. Angela Fan, Mike Lewis, and Yann Dauphin.
\newblock Hierarchical neural story generation.
\newblock In Iryna Gurevych and Yusuke Miyao (eds.), \emph{Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers)}, pp.\  889--898, Melbourne, Australia, July 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics.
\newblock \doi{10.18653/v1/P18-1082}.
\newblock URL \url{https://aclanthology.org/P18-1082}.
26. Yassir Fathullah, Chunyang Wu, Egor Lakomkin, Junteng Jia, Yuan Shangguan, Ke~Li, Jinxi Guo, Wenhan Xiong, Jay Mahadeokar, Ozlem Kalinli, et~al.
\newblock Prompting large language models with speech recognition abilities.
\newblock In \emph{ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pp.\  13351--13355. IEEE, 2024.
27. Yuan Gao, Nobuyuki Morioka, Yu~Zhang, and Nanxin Chen.
\newblock E3 tts: Easy end-to-end diffusion-based text to speech.
\newblock In \emph{2023 IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding Workshop (ASRU)}, pp.\  1--8. IEEE, 2023.
28. Deepanway Ghosal, Navonil Majumder, Ambuj Mehrish, and Soujanya Poria.
\newblock Text-to-audio generation using instruction guided latent diffusion model.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Multimedia}, MM '23, pp.\  3590–3598, New York, NY, USA, 2023. Association for Computing Machinery.
\newblock ISBN 9798400701085.
\newblock \doi{10.1145/3581783.3612348}.
\newblock URL \url{https://doi.org/10.1145/3581783.3612348}.
29. Robert Gray.
\newblock Vector quantization.
\newblock \emph{IEEE Assp Magazine}, 1\penalty0 (2):\penalty0 4--29, 1984.
30. Geonmo Gu, Sanghyuk Chun, Wonjae Kim, HeeJae Jun, Yoohoon Kang, and Sangdoo Yun.
\newblock Compodiff: Versatile composed image retrieval with latent diffusion.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11916}, 2023. [arXiv:2303.11916](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.11916)
31. Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans.
\newblock Classifier-free diffusion guidance.
\newblock In \emph{NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on Deep Generative Models and Downstream Applications}, 2021.
\newblock URL \url{https://openreview.net/forum?id=qw8AKxfYbI}.
32. Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel.
\newblock Denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
\newblock In \emph{Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)}, pp.\  6840--6851, 2020.
33. Emiel Hoogeboom, Jonathan Heek, and Tim Salimans.
\newblock simple diffusion: End-to-end diffusion for high resolution images.
\newblock In \emph{International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML)}, pp.\  13213--13232. PMLR, 2023.
34. Wei-Ning Hsu, Benjamin Bolte, Yao-Hung~Hubert Tsai, Kushal Lakhotia, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Abdelrahman Mohamed.
\newblock Hubert: Self-supervised speech representation learning by masked prediction of hidden units.
\newblock \emph{IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing}, 29:\penalty0 3451--3460, 2021.
35. Keith Ito and Linda Johnson.
\newblock The lj speech dataset.
\newblock \url{https://keithito.com/LJ-Speech-Dataset/}, 2017.
36. Ziyue Jiang, Yi~Ren, Zhenhui Ye, Jinglin Liu, Chen Zhang, Qian Yang, Shengpeng Ji, Rongjie Huang, Chunfeng Wang, Xiang Yin, et~al.
\newblock Mega-tts: Zero-shot text-to-speech at scale with intrinsic inductive bias.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03509}, 2023. [arXiv:2306.03509](../2023/2306.03509.md)
37. Ziyue Jiang, Jinglin Liu, Yi~Ren, Jinzheng He, Zhenhui Ye, Shengpeng Ji, Qian Yang, Chen Zhang, Pengfei Wei, Chunfeng Wang, et~al.
\newblock Mega-tts 2: Boosting prompting mechanisms for zero-shot speech synthesis.
\newblock In \emph{International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)}, 2024.
38. Zeqian Ju, Yuancheng Wang, Kai Shen, Xu~Tan, Detai Xin, Dongchao Yang, Yanqing Liu, Yichong Leng, Kaitao Song, Siliang Tang, Zhizheng Wu, Tao Qin, Xiang-Yang Li, Wei Ye, Shikun Zhang, Jiang Bian, Lei He, Jinyu Li, and Sheng Zhao.
\newblock Naturalspeech 3: Zero-shot speech synthesis with factorized codec and diffusion models.
\newblock In \emph{International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML)}, June 2024.
39. Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom~B. Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei.
\newblock Scaling laws for neural language models.
\newblock \emph{CoRR}, abs/2001.08361, 2020.
\newblock URL \url{https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.08361}.
40. Eugene Kharitonov, Damien Vincent, Zalán Borsos, Raphaël Marinier, Sertan Girgin, Olivier Pietquin, Matt Sharifi, Marco Tagliasacchi, and Neil Zeghidour.
\newblock {Speak, Read and Prompt: High-Fidelity Text-to-Speech with Minimal Supervision}.
\newblock \emph{Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics}, 11:\penalty0 1703--1718, 12 2023.
\newblock ISSN 2307-387X.
\newblock \doi{10.1162/tacl_a_00618}.
41. Heeseung Kim, Sungwon Kim, and Sungroh Yoon.
\newblock Guided-tts: A diffusion model for text-to-speech via classifier guidance.
\newblock In \emph{International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML)}, pp.\  11119--11133. PMLR, 2022.
42. Jaehyeon Kim, Sungwon Kim, Jungil Kong, and Sungroh Yoon.
\newblock Glow-tts: A generative flow for text-to-speech via monotonic alignment search.
\newblock \emph{Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)}, 33:\penalty0 8067--8077, 2020.
43. Jaehyeon Kim, Jungil Kong, and Juhee Son.
\newblock Conditional variational autoencoder with adversarial learning for end-to-end text-to-speech.
\newblock In \emph{International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML)}, pp.\  5530--5540. PMLR, 2021.
44. Jaehyeon Kim, Keon Lee, Seungjun Chung, and Jaewoong Cho.
\newblock {CL}am-{TTS}: Improving neural codec language model for zero-shot text-to-speech.
\newblock In \emph{International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)}, 2024{\natexlab{a}}.
\newblock URL \url{https://openreview.net/forum?id=ofzeypWosV}.
45. Sungwon Kim, Kevin Shih, Joao~Felipe Santos, Evelina Bakhturina, Mikyas Desta, Rafael Valle, Sungroh Yoon, Bryan Catanzaro, et~al.
\newblock P-flow: A fast and data-efficient zero-shot tts through speech prompting.
\newblock \emph{Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)}, 36, 2024{\natexlab{b}}.
46. Yuma Koizumi, Heiga Zen, Shigeki Karita, Yifan Ding, Kohei Yatabe, Nobuyuki Morioka, Michiel Bacchiani, Yu~Zhang, Wei Han, and Ankur Bapna.
\newblock {LibriTTS-R: A Restored Multi-Speaker Text-to-Speech Corpus}.
\newblock In \emph{Interspeech}, pp.\  5496--5500, 2023.
\newblock \doi{10.21437/Interspeech.2023-1584}.
47. Zhifeng Kong, Wei Ping, Jiaji Huang, Kexin Zhao, and Bryan Catanzaro.
\newblock Diffwave: A versatile diffusion model for audio synthesis.
\newblock In \emph{International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)}, 2020.
48. Rithesh Kumar, Prem Seetharaman, Alejandro Luebs, Ishaan Kumar, and Kundan Kumar.
\newblock High-fidelity audio compression with improved rvqgan.
\newblock \emph{Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)}, 36, 2024.
49. Matthew Le, Apoorv Vyas, Bowen Shi, Brian Karrer, Leda Sari, Rashel Moritz, Mary Williamson, Vimal Manohar, Yossi Adi, Jay Mahadeokar, and Wei-Ning Hsu.
\newblock Voicebox: Text-guided multilingual universal speech generation at scale.
\newblock In A.~Oh, T.~Neumann, A.~Globerson, K.~Saenko, M.~Hardt, and S.~Levine (eds.), \emph{Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)}, volume~36, pp.\  14005--14034. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023.
50. Doyup Lee, Chiheon Kim, Saehoon Kim, Minsu Cho, and Wook-Shin Han.
\newblock Autoregressive image generation using residual quantization.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pp.\  11523--11532, 2022.
51. Sang-Hoon Lee, Ha-Yeong Choi, Seung-Bin Kim, and Seong-Whan Lee.
\newblock Hierspeech++: Bridging the gap between semantic and acoustic representation of speech by hierarchical variational inference for zero-shot speech synthesis.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.12454}, 2023{\natexlab{a}}. [arXiv:2311.12454](../2023/2311.12454.md)
52. Sanggil Lee, Wei Ping, Boris Ginsburg, Bryan Catanzaro, and Sungroh Yoon.
\newblock Big{VGAN}: A universal neural vocoder with large-scale training.
\newblock In \emph{International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)}, 2023{\natexlab{b}}.
\newblock URL \url{https://openreview.net/forum?id=iTtGCMDEzS_}.
53. Yeonghyeon Lee, Inmo Yeon, Juhan Nam, and Joon~Son Chung.
\newblock Voiceldm: Text-to-speech with environmental context.
\newblock In \emph{ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pp.\  12566--12571. IEEE, 2024.
54. Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi.
\newblock {BLIP}-2: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models.
\newblock In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), \emph{International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML)}, volume 202 of \emph{Proceedings of Machine Learning Research}, pp.\  19730--19742. PMLR, 23--29 Jul 2023.
\newblock URL \url{https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/li23q.html}.
55. Yinghao~Aaron Li, Cong Han, Vinay Raghavan, Gavin Mischler, and Nima Mesgarani.
\newblock Styletts 2: Towards human-level text-to-speech through style diffusion and adversarial training with large speech language models.
\newblock \emph{Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)}, 36, 2024.
56. Yaron Lipman, Ricky~TQ Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel, and Matthew Le.
\newblock Flow matching for generative modeling.
\newblock In \emph{International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)}, 2022.
57. Haohe Liu, Zehua Chen, Yi~Yuan, Xinhao Mei, Xubo Liu, Danilo Mandic, Wenwu Wang, and Mark~D Plumbley.
\newblock Audioldm: Text-to-audio generation with latent diffusion models.
\newblock In \emph{International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML)}, pp.\  21450--21474. PMLR, 2023.
58. Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong~Jae Lee.
\newblock Visual instruction tuning.
\newblock \emph{Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)}, 36, 2024.
59. Steven~R Livingstone and Frank~A Russo.
\newblock The ryerson audio-visual database of emotional speech and song (ravdess): A dynamic, multimodal set of facial and vocal expressions in north american english.
\newblock \emph{PloS one}, 13\penalty0 (5):\penalty0 e0196391, 2018.
60. Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.
\newblock Decoupled weight decay regularization.
\newblock In \emph{International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)}, 2019.
\newblock URL \url{https://openreview.net/forum?id=Bkg6RiCqY7}.
61. Justin Lovelace, Soham Ray, Kwangyoun Kim, Kilian~Q Weinberger, and Felix Wu.
\newblock Simple-{TTS}: End-to-end text-to-speech synthesis with latent diffusion, 2024.
\newblock URL \url{https://openreview.net/forum?id=m4mwbPjOwb}.
62. Tu~Anh Nguyen, Wei-Ning Hsu, Antony D'Avirro, Bowen Shi, Itai Gat, Maryam Fazel-Zarani, Tal Remez, Jade Copet, Gabriel Synnaeve, Michael Hassid, Felix Kreuk, Yossi Adi, and Emmanuel Dupoux.
\newblock {Expresso: A Benchmark and Analysis of Discrete Expressive Speech Resynthesis}.
\newblock In \emph{Interspeech}, pp.\  4823--4827, 2023.
\newblock \doi{10.21437/Interspeech.2023-1905}.
63. Alexander~Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal.
\newblock Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
\newblock In \emph{International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML)}, pp.\  8162--8171. PMLR, 2021.
64. OpenAI.
\newblock Chat{GPT}.
\newblock \url{https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt/}, 2022.
65. OpenAI.
\newblock Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
66. Vassil Panayotov, Guoguo Chen, Daniel Povey, and Sanjeev Khudanpur.
\newblock Librispeech: an asr corpus based on public domain audio books.
\newblock In \emph{ICASSP 2015-2015 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pp.\  5206--5210. IEEE, 2015.
67. William Peebles and Saining Xie.
\newblock Scalable diffusion models with transformers.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision}, pp.\  4195--4205, 2023.
68. Vadim Popov, Ivan Vovk, Vladimir Gogoryan, Tasnima Sadekova, and Mikhail Kudinov.
\newblock Grad-tts: A diffusion probabilistic model for text-to-speech.
\newblock In \emph{International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML)}, pp.\  8599--8608. PMLR, 2021.
69. Vineel Pratap, Qiantong Xu, Anuroop Sriram, Gabriel Synnaeve, and Ronan Collobert.
\newblock {MLS: A Large-Scale Multilingual Dataset for Speech Research}.
\newblock In \emph{Interspeech}, pp.\  2757--2761, 2020.
\newblock \doi{10.21437/Interspeech.2020-2826}.
70. Alec Radford, Jong~Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine McLeavey, and Ilya Sutskever.
\newblock Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision.
\newblock In \emph{International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML)}, pp.\  28492--28518. PMLR, 2023.
71. Antony~W Rix, John~G Beerends, Michael~P Hollier, and Andries~P Hekstra.
\newblock Perceptual evaluation of speech quality (pesq)-a new method for speech quality assessment of telephone networks and codecs.
\newblock In \emph{2001 IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech, and signal processing. Proceedings (Cat. No. 01CH37221)}, volume~2, pp.\  749--752. IEEE, 2001.
72. Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Bj{\"o}rn Ommer.
\newblock High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pp.\  10684--10695, 2022.
73. Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox.
\newblock U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation.
\newblock In Nassir Navab, Joachim Hornegger, William~M. Wells, and Alejandro~F. Frangi (eds.), \emph{Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention -- MICCAI 2015}, pp.\  234--241, Cham, 2015. Springer International Publishing.
\newblock ISBN 978-3-319-24574-4.
74. Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily~L Denton, Kamyar Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo~Lopes, Burcu Karagol~Ayan, Tim Salimans, et~al.
\newblock Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding.
\newblock \emph{Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)}, 35:\penalty0 36479--36494, 2022.
75. Tim Salimans and Jonathan Ho.
\newblock Progressive distillation for fast sampling of diffusion models.
\newblock In \emph{International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)}, 2022.
\newblock URL \url{https://openreview.net/forum?id=TIdIXIpzhoI}.
76. Noam Shazeer.
\newblock Glu variants improve transformer.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.05202}, 2020. [arXiv:2002.05202](https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.05202)
77. Kai Shen, Zeqian Ju, Xu~Tan, Eric Liu, Yichong Leng, Lei He, Tao Qin, Jiang Bian, et~al.
\newblock Naturalspeech 2: Latent diffusion models are natural and zero-shot speech and singing synthesizers.
\newblock In \emph{International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)}, 2024.
78. Kyuhong Shim, Wonyong Sung, et~al.
\newblock Understanding the role of self attention for efficient speech recognition.
\newblock In \emph{International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)}, pp.\  1--19. International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2022.
79. Mohammad Shoeybi, Mostofa Patwary, Raul Puri, Patrick LeGresley, Jared Casper, and Bryan Catanzaro.
\newblock Megatron-lm: Training multi-billion parameter language models using model parallelism.
\newblock \emph{CoRR}, abs/1909.08053, 2019.
\newblock URL \url{http://arxiv.org/abs/1909.08053}.
80. Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi~Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan Hu, Harry Yang, Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, et~al.
\newblock Make-a-video: Text-to-video generation without text-video data.
\newblock In \emph{International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)}, 2022.
81. Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon.
\newblock Denoising diffusion implicit models.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02502}, 2020{\natexlab{a}}. [arXiv:2010.02502](https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.02502)
82. Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon.
\newblock Denoising diffusion implicit models.
\newblock In \emph{International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)}, 2021.
\newblock URL \url{https://openreview.net/forum?id=St1giarCHLP}.
83. Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik~P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben Poole.
\newblock Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations.
\newblock In \emph{International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)}, 2020{\natexlab{b}}.
84. Jianlin Su, Murtadha Ahmed, Yu~Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Wen Bo, and Yunfeng Liu.
\newblock Roformer: Enhanced transformer with rotary position embedding.
\newblock \emph{Neurocomputing}, 568:\penalty0 127063, 2024.
85. Gemma Team, Thomas Mesnard, Cassidy Hardin, Robert Dadashi, Surya Bhupatiraju, Shreya Pathak, Laurent Sifre, Morgane Rivi{\`e}re, Mihir~Sanjay Kale, Juliette Love, et~al.
\newblock Gemma: Open models based on gemini research and technology.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08295}, 2024. [arXiv:2403.08295](https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.08295)
86. Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timoth{\'e}e Lacroix, Baptiste Rozi{\`e}re, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et~al.
\newblock Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971}, 2023. [arXiv:2302.13971](https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.13971)
87. A~Vasuki and PT~Vanathi.
\newblock A review of vector quantization techniques.
\newblock \emph{IEEE Potentials}, 25\penalty0 (4):\penalty0 39--47, 2006.
88. Christophe Veaux, Junichi Yamagishi, Kirsten MacDonald, et~al.
\newblock Superseded-cstr vctk corpus: English multi-speaker corpus for cstr voice cloning toolkit.
\newblock \emph{University of Edinburgh. The Centre for Speech Technology Research (CSTR)}, 2016.
89. Apoorv Vyas, Bowen Shi, Matthew Le, Andros Tjandra, Yi-Chiao Wu, Baishan Guo, Jiemin Zhang, Xinyue Zhang, Robert Adkins, William Ngan, et~al.
\newblock Audiobox: Unified audio generation with natural language prompts.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.15821}, 2023. [arXiv:2312.15821](../2023/2312.15821.md)
90. Chengyi Wang, Sanyuan Chen, Yu~Wu, Ziqiang Zhang, Long Zhou, Shujie Liu, Zhuo Chen, Yanqing Liu, Huaming Wang, Jinyu Li, et~al.
\newblock Neural codec language models are zero-shot text to speech synthesizers.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.02111}, 2023. [arXiv:2301.02111](../2023/2301.02111.md)
91. Linting Xue, Aditya Barua, Noah Constant, Rami Al-Rfou, Sharan Narang, Mihir Kale, Adam Roberts, and Colin Raffel.
\newblock {B}y{T}5: Towards a token-free future with pre-trained byte-to-byte models.
\newblock \emph{Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics}, 10:\penalty0 291--306, 2022.
\newblock \doi{10.1162/tacl_a_00461}.
\newblock URL \url{https://aclanthology.org/2022.tacl-1.17}.
92. Dongchao Yang, Dingdong Wang, Haohan Guo, Xueyuan Chen, Xixin Wu, and Helen Meng.
\newblock Simplespeech: Towards simple and efficient text-to-speech with scalar latent transformer diffusion models.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.02328}, 2024{\natexlab{a}}. [arXiv:2406.02328](./2406.02328.md)
93. Dongchao Yang, Dingdong Wang, Haohan Guo, Xueyuan Chen, Xixin Wu, and Helen Meng.
\newblock Simplespeech: Towards simple and efficient text-to-speech with scalar latent transformer diffusion models.
\newblock In \emph{Interspeech 2024}, pp.\  4398--4402, 2024{\natexlab{b}}.
\newblock \doi{10.21437/Interspeech.2024-1392}.
94. Heiga Zen, Viet Dang, Rob Clark, Yu~Zhang, Ron~J. Weiss, Ye~Jia, Zhifeng Chen, and Yonghui Wu.
\newblock {LibriTTS: A Corpus Derived from LibriSpeech for Text-to-Speech}.
\newblock In \emph{Interspeech}, pp.\  1526--1530, 2019.
\newblock \doi{10.21437/Interspeech.2019-2441}.
95. Xin Zhang, Dong Zhang, Shimin Li, Yaqian Zhou, and Xipeng Qiu.
\newblock Speechtokenizer: Unified speech tokenizer for speech language models.
\newblock In \emph{International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)}, 2024.
\newblock URL \url{https://openreview.net/forum?id=AF9Q8Vip84}.
96. Yang Zhang, Evelina Bakhturina, and Boris Ginsburg.
\newblock {NeMo (Inverse) Text Normalization: From Development to Production}.
\newblock In \emph{Interspeech}, pp.\  4857--4859, 2021.
