---
arxiv_id: '2409.12403'
title: Preference Alignment Improves Language Model-Based TTS
authors:
- Jinchuan Tian et.al.
submitted: '2024-09-19'
categories: []
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.12403
source: arxiv-html
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 0/0
citations_resolved_at: '2026-07-07T16:10:41+00:00'
references_parsed: 0
arxiv_version: ''
---

# Preference Alignment Improves Language Model-Based TTS ^(†)^(†)thanks:  Jinchuan and Jiatong are interns at Tencent AI LAB during this work. Chunlei Zhang is the corresponding author. Code will be released in ESPnet. 

Jinchuan Tian¹, Chunlei Zhang², Jiatong Shi¹, Hao Zhang², Jianwei Yu², Shinji Watanabe¹, Dong Yu²\
\
¹Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, ²Tencent AI LAB\
{jinchuat, jiatongs, swatanab}@andrew.cmu.edu, {cleizhang, aaronhzhang, tomasyu, dyu}@tencent.com

###### Abstract

Recent advancements in text-to-speech (TTS) have shown that language model (LM)-based systems offer competitive performance, largely due to their scalability. Further optimization can be achieved through preference alignment algorithms, which adjust LMs to align with the preferences of reward models, enhancing the desirability of the generated content. This study presents a thorough empirical evaluation of how preference alignment algorithms, mainly Direct Preference Optimization (DPO), enhance LM-based TTS. Using a 1.15B parameter LM-based TTS model trained on 55,000 hours of speech data, we demonstrate that preference alignment consistently improves intelligibility, speaker similarity, and proxy subjective evaluation scores, with the latter two metrics surpassing even human speech in certain evaluations.

###### Index Terms:

Text-to-Speech, Language Model, Human-Feedback Reinforcement Learning, Preference Alignment

## I Introduction

Text-to-speech (TTS) aims to synthesize human speech from the given text and, optionally, non-text conditions \[survey\]. Traditionally, mainstream TTS systems operate in continuous space \[fastspeech, tacotron, vits\]. However, recent advancements in audio coding have enabled high-quality audio tokenization \[soundstream, encodec, du2024funcodec, zhang2024speechtokenizer, espnet_codec\], allowing TTS models to shift toward discrete space \[discrete_challenge\]. This shift has paved the way for language model (LM)-based approaches \[valle, speartts, yang2024uniaudio, seedtts, vallex, audiolm, audiopalm, soundstorm\], which represent continuous speech as discrete tokens, simplifying training and enabling the model to learn the relationships between input and output sequences more efficiently. LM-based TTS systems have gained popularity due to their scalability and ability to achieve state-of-the-art performance, particularly when trained with large datasets and parameter sizes \[audiolm_survey\]. These models also exhibit impressive zero-shot capabilities in tasks like speaker identity cloning \[valle\] and cross-lingual synthesis \[vallex\], making them highly versatile.

Despite these advances, achieving high-quality, natural-sounding speech requires more than just scaling up data and model parameters. Models must align their output with human preferences, which can be abstract and challenging to capture using conventional methods such as cross-entropy loss. Preference alignment (PA) algorithms address this issue by optimizing model behavior according to predefined preferences, often modeled as a reinforcement learning problem \[hfrl_survey\]. Typically formulated as a reinforcement learning problem, PA first models the preferences by a reward model and then uses the reward model to guide LMs toward generating content that maximizes reward values \[ppo, instructgpt\]. When these preferences are derived from humans, the process is widely known as human feedback reinforcement learning (HFRL). Recent advancements in PA allow for solving the alignment problem in closed form, eliminating the need for explicit reward modeling, which significantly simplifies and stabilizes training \[dpo, kto, simpo, ipo, orpo\]. PA (or HFRL) is verified effective in understanding and following highly abstract preference (e.g., human value), and has become a common practice to ensure that text LMs exhibit desirable traits, such as helpfulness, truthfulness, and harmlessness \[gpt4\].

In this work, we apply PA objectives to LM-based TTS systems, guiding them to generate speech that is preferred across multiple metrics. We address multiple key practical issues, including (1) training example curation; (2) hyperparameter tuning; (3) selection of preference metrics; (4) the effect of supervised fine-tuning (SFT); (5) data efficiency; (6) iterative optimization; (7) comparison of PA objectives; (8) out-of-domain evaluation; and (9) alignment with unseen metrics and human perception. Our baseline model, with 1.15B parameters, is trained on 55,000 hours of open-source English speech data. We demonstrate that applying PA objectives significantly enhances intelligibility, speaker similarity, and proxy subjective evaluation scores, with the latter two even surpassing human ground truth in some cases. Furthermore, evaluations using unseen metrics and human assessments confirm the model’s ability to generalize beyond the specific preference metrics used during training.

## II Preference Alignment on Language Model-Based TTS

### II-A Language Model-Based TTS

TTS is a conditional generation task that generates continuous speech $`\mathbf{y}`$ based on the given conditions $`\mathbf{x}`$, such as input text string $`\mathbf{s}`$ and other non-textual cues. For simplicity, this work assumes a short clip from the same speaker of $`\mathbf{y}`$, i.e., $`\mathbf{y}_{ref}`$, is the only non-textual cue, so that features like speaker identity and prosody can be imitated. Thus, the training objective of TTS is to maximize the posterior:

``` math
{{\max\limits_{\theta}P_{\theta}}{(\left. \mathbf{y} \middle| \mathbf{x} \right.)}} = {{\max\limits_{\theta}P_{\theta}}{(\left. \mathbf{y} \middle| {\mathbf{s},\mathbf{y}_{ref}} \right.)}}
```

where $`\theta`$ is the trainable parameter of the LM.

In the context of discrete space modeling, particularly LM-based TTS, all audio $`\mathbf{y}`$, $`\mathbf{y}_{ref}`$ can be converted into discrete tokens by audio codec encoding \[soundstream, encodec, du2024funcodec, zhang2024speechtokenizer, espnet_codec\], s.t., $`{\mathbf{y}^{d},\mathbf{y}_{ref}^{d}} \in {\mathbb{Z}}^{T \times n_{q}}`$, where $`T`$ and $`n_{q}`$ stand for the number of frames and the number of discrete tokens to represent each audio frame respectively. Text input $`\mathbf{s}`$ can also be tokenized into a one-dimensional integer vector $`\mathbf{s}^{d} \in {\mathbb{Z}}^{T}`$. By repeating or padding $`\mathbf{s}^{d}`$ to two-dimensional and then splicing it with $`\mathbf{y}_{ref}^{d}`$ and $`\mathbf{y}^{d}`$ in $`T`$-axis, the example sequence $`{\lbrack\mathbf{s}^{d},\mathbf{y}_{ref}^{d},\mathbf{y}^{d}\rbrack} \in {\mathbb{Z}}^{T \times n_{q}}`$ is formed and then learned by a language model. Cross-entropy loss is applied to each token in $`\mathbf{y}^{d}`$ so that the posterior $`P_{\theta}{(\left. \mathbf{y}^{d} \middle| {\mathbf{s}^{d},\mathbf{y}_{ref}^{d}} \right.)}`$ is maximized. During inference, the predicted token sequence $`{\hat{\mathbf{y}}}^{d}`$ is first generated by LM, and then the output waveform $`\hat{\mathbf{y}}`$ can be reconstructed from it using audio codec decoding.

As most LMs work on one-dimensional sequences, applying LMs to these two-dimensional sequences needs additional model design, which is beyond the scope of this work. We refer \[musicgen, yang2024uniaudio\] for details. For simplicity, in the rest of this paper, we re-name the conditional sequence as $`\text{x} = {\lbrack\text{s}^{d},\text{y}_{ref}^{d}\rbrack}`$ and the target sequence $`\mathbf{y} = {\lbrack\mathbf{y}^{d}\rbrack}`$, both are in discrete space.

### II-B Preference Alignment

Cross-entropy objective in LM-based TTS training is to maximize the posterior of target sequence $`\mathbf{y}`$. However, higher posterior in $`\mathbf{y}`$ (and the corresponding waveform reconstructed from it) does not necessarily lead to content that is more preferred by human perception or other proxy metrics \[human_like\]. Alternatively, PA is an approach that directly optimizes the LM toward these preferences and thus improves the sample quality \[hfrl_survey\].

Question Formulation: PA is usually described as a reinforcement learning problem: assume there is a latent reward model $`r^{\ast}{(\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y})}`$ that represents the preferences by a scalar reward, higher means more preferred. Thus, with the given reward model, the optimization objective is to guide the LM to pursue a higher expected reward:

``` math
\max\limits_{\theta}{\mathbb{E}}_{\mathbf{y} \sim {P_{\theta}{({\mathbf{y}|\mathbf{x}})}}}{\lbrack r{(\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y})}\rbrack} - \beta \cdot {\mathbb{D}}_{KL}{\lbrack P_{\theta}{(\mathbf{y}|\mathbf{x})}||P_{ref}{(\mathbf{y}|\mathbf{x})}\rbrack}
```

where the latter term is a KL-divergence constraint to avoid the LM model $`P_{\theta}`$ drifting too far away from a reference model $`P_{ref}`$. $`\beta`$ is a hyper-parameter, larger means stronger constraint. In common practice, the reference model $`P_{ref}`$ is initialized identically with $`P_{\theta}`$ and is frozen during training.

Conventionally, the optimization in Eq.[2](https://arxiv.org/html/2409.12403v1#S2.E2 "In II-B Preference Alignment ‣ II Preference Alignment on Language Model-Based TTS ‣ Preference Alignment Improves Language Model-Based TTS Jinchuan and Jiatong are interns at Tencent AI LAB during this work. Chunlei Zhang is the corresponding author. Code will be released in ESPnet.") works with an explicit reward model \[instructgpt\]. As the latent reward model is usually unavailable, a proxy reward model $`r_{\phi}{(\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y})}`$ is first built from the preference dataset instead. Subsequently, the optimization is conducted using proximal policy optimization (PPO) \[ppo\]. This workflow is complicated and PPO sometimes encounters issues in training instability \[zhu2023fine\]. Recent advances in PA demonstrate that, under certain circumstances, the optimization in Eq.[2](https://arxiv.org/html/2409.12403v1#S2.E2 "In II-B Preference Alignment ‣ II Preference Alignment on Language Model-Based TTS ‣ Preference Alignment Improves Language Model-Based TTS Jinchuan and Jiatong are interns at Tencent AI LAB during this work. Chunlei Zhang is the corresponding author. Code will be released in ESPnet.") can be solved in close form without building an explicit reward model. A representative approach is Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) \[dpo\].

Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) DPO deals with a special case where the preference data is win-lose pairs: with the same conditions $`\mathbf{x}`$, the probability of $`\mathbf{y}_{w}`$ being more preferred than sequence $`\mathbf{y}_{l}`$ follows Bradley-Terry model \[btmodel\]:

``` math
{P{({\mathbf{y}_{w} > \left. \mathbf{y}_{l} \middle| \mathbf{x} \right.})}} = \frac{\text{exp}{({r^{\ast}{(\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y}_{w})}})}}{{\text{exp}{({r^{\ast}{(\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y}_{w})}})}} + {\text{exp}{({r^{\ast}{(\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y}_{l})}})}}}
```

So that, with the known preference data triplets ($`\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y}_{w}`$, $`\mathbf{y}_{l}`$), an explicit proxy reward model $`r_{\phi}`$ can be trained by maximum-a-likelihood criterion:

``` math
{\max\limits_{r_{\phi}}{\mathbb{E}}_{\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y}_{w},\mathbf{y}_{l}}}{\lbrack{{\log\sigma}{({{r_{\phi}{(\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y}_{w})}} - {r_{\phi}{(\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y}_{l})}}})}}\rbrack}
```

Also, it has been proved that, in Eq.[2](https://arxiv.org/html/2409.12403v1#S2.E2 "In II-B Preference Alignment ‣ II Preference Alignment on Language Model-Based TTS ‣ Preference Alignment Improves Language Model-Based TTS Jinchuan and Jiatong are interns at Tencent AI LAB during this work. Chunlei Zhang is the corresponding author. Code will be released in ESPnet."), the LM $`P_{\theta}{(\left. \mathbf{y} \middle| \mathbf{x} \right.)}`$ becomes optimal if and only if:

``` math
{r_{\phi}{(\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y}_{w},\mathbf{y}_{l})}} = {{\beta \cdot \frac{P_{\theta}{(\left. \mathbf{y} \middle| \mathbf{x} \right.)}}{P_{ref}{(\left. \mathbf{y} \middle| \mathbf{x} \right.)}}} + {{\beta \cdot {\mathbb{Z}}}{(\mathbf{x})}}}
```

where $`{\mathbb{Z}}{(\mathbf{x})}`$ is termed partition function that is independent of the generation target $`\mathbf{y}`$.

Finally, substituting Eq.[5](https://arxiv.org/html/2409.12403v1#S2.E5 "In II-B Preference Alignment ‣ II Preference Alignment on Language Model-Based TTS ‣ Preference Alignment Improves Language Model-Based TTS Jinchuan and Jiatong are interns at Tencent AI LAB during this work. Chunlei Zhang is the corresponding author. Code will be released in ESPnet.") into Eq.[4](https://arxiv.org/html/2409.12403v1#S2.E4 "In II-B Preference Alignment ‣ II Preference Alignment on Language Model-Based TTS ‣ Preference Alignment Improves Language Model-Based TTS Jinchuan and Jiatong are interns at Tencent AI LAB during this work. Chunlei Zhang is the corresponding author. Code will be released in ESPnet.") excludes the reward model $`r_{\phi}{(\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y})}`$; training the explicit reward models is then transformed as direct optimization over the LM $`P_{\theta}{(\left. \mathbf{y} \middle| \mathbf{x} \right.)}`$:

``` math
L_{DPO} = {{\max\limits_{\theta}{\mathbb{E}}}{\lbrack{{\log\sigma}{({{\beta \cdot {\log\frac{P_{\theta}{(\left. \mathbf{y}_{w} \middle| \mathbf{x} \right.)}}{P_{ref}{(\left. \mathbf{y}_{w} \middle| \mathbf{x} \right.)}}}} - {\beta \cdot {\log\frac{P_{\theta}{(\left. \mathbf{y}_{l} \middle| \mathbf{x} \right.)}}{P_{ref}{(\left. \mathbf{y}_{l} \middle| \mathbf{x} \right.)}}}}})}}\rbrack}}
```

Other Preference Alignment Methods: Besides DPO, there are other PA methods that use implicit reward models. KTO \[kto\] is derived from an assumption that humans are loss-averse; it allows that $`\mathbf{y}_{w}`$ and $`\mathbf{y}_{l}`$ to be unpaired. SimPO \[simpo\] intends to get rid of the reference $`P_{ref}{(\left. \mathbf{y} \middle| \mathbf{x} \right.)}`$ during training for simplicity and efficiency. IPO \[ipo\] is extended from DPO and uses an extra term to alleviate over-fitting. ORPO \[orpo\] combines the preference alignment stage with the supervised fine-tuning (SFT) stage for simplicity.

## III Experiments

### III-A Experimental Setup

Data, Task Setup, and Tokenization: We construct our baseline model using LibriSpeech \[librispeech-corpus\], GigaSpeech \[gigaspeech\], and the English portion of Multilingual LibriSpeech (MLS) \[pratap2020mls\], amounting to approximately 55,000 hours of speech data. Speaker IDs are always available for all datasets and are used to select a 3-second speech clip from the same speaker¹¹1Speaker IDs of GigaSpeech are generated by AutoPrep \[autoprep\].. All input text is tokenized into phoneme sequences by g2p-en²²2https://github.com/Kyubyong/g2p before language modeling. For audio tokenization, we use our reproduced SoundStream model \[soundstream\], configured to operate at 50 frames per second with 8 codes per frame.

Model: We adopt Multi-Scale Transformer \[yang2024uniaudio\] as the model architecture, which fully preserves the auto-regressive property within the two-dimensional example sequence. The Multi-Scale Transformer contains a global Transformer and a local Transformer, both of which are causal. The global Transformer has 25 layers, each of which has an attention size of 1600, a feedforward size of 6400, and 25 attention heads. Those numbers for the local Transformer are {6, 384, 1536, 6}. The total trainable parameters are 1.15B.

Training and Inference: The baseline model is updated by 1M steps with the global batch size of around 80k frames. AdamW optimizer \[adamw\] with a peak learning rate of 2e-4 is adopted, with 70k warmup steps, and then decays exponentially. Training is based on 8$`\times`$A100-40G GPUs. For inference, we settled down with top-k sampling using $`k = 30`$; we re-scale the logits with a temperature of 1.2. For each example, we do batch inference with the size of 10 using identical text and reference speech clips. We do not introduce any human prior in the selection of reference speech clips as they are usually provided by users.

Preference Metrics and Evaluation: Collecting preference data directly from humans is expensive. Instead, this work adopts several model-based metrics as the proxy of the real preferences. Specifically, we are interested in three metrics of the generated content: intelligibility (WER), speaker similarity (SPK_SIM), and subjective evaluation scores (Proxy MOS). The corresponding preference pairs are obtained by comparing and ranking the 10 utterances generated from the same conditions. The computing of these metrics relies on several pre-trained models, such as whisper-large for WER; Speaker embeddings from RawNet \[jung19b_interspeech\] for SPK_SIM; UTMOS \[utmos\] for Proxy MOS. These models are also used in most evaluations. We use additional pre-trained models to ensure the TTS model is improved in general rather than over-fits to the preference of pre-trained models. As 10 utterances are generated for each example, we report every number in the format of mean/max/min. We adopt LibriSpeech Test-Clean and VCTK Test \[vctk\] for in-domain and out-of-domain evaluation respectively. We also conduct back-by-back subjective evaluations before/after the PA training.

### III-B Experiments and Analysis

We first demonstrate the performance of our optimal model E2 and our baseline model in table [I](https://arxiv.org/html/2409.12403v1#S3.T1 "TABLE I ‣ III-B Experiments and Analysis ‣ III Experiments ‣ Preference Alignment Improves Language Model-Based TTS Jinchuan and Jiatong are interns at Tencent AI LAB during this work. Chunlei Zhang is the corresponding author. Code will be released in ESPnet."). Although the baseline model already achieves comparable performance with popular open-sourced systems, applying DPO still achieves significant improvement on all three metrics. We detailed our exploration step-by-step as follows.

|                     |              |                   |                |
|---------------------|--------------|-------------------|----------------|
| System              | WER          | SPK_SIM           | Proxy MOS      |
| Ground Truth        | 1.8          | 0.625             | 4.08           |
| Baseline            | 4.5/1.4/13.5 | 0.635/0.722/0.520 | 3.80/4.14/3.30 |
| Baseline + DPO (E1) | 3.0/1.0/08.8 | 0.667/0.732/0.592 | 4.23/4.31/3.75 |
| ChatTTS             |              |                   |                |

TABLE I: Caption

All PA experiments are based on LibriSpeech. As LibriSpeech is already included in baseline model training, this setup excludes the impact of introducing unseen data. We conduct inference on the whole train-960 set for follow-up preference data curation. Our exploration is mainly based on DPO with a conservative setup in the initial trial: a constant learning rate of 3e-7 and $`\beta = 0.1`$. Empirically, we find DPO is sensitive to the number of updates, so we use a large batch size to ensure only 350 updates are made within one epoch.

#### III-B1 Preference Pairs Selection

We examine two solutions to how preference data pairs are curated. A2: use ground truth as $`\mathbf{y}_{w}`$ and a randomly selected generated example as $`\mathbf{y}_{l}`$. This assumes the ground truth always outperforms generated examples. B2: rank all generated samples using certain preference metrics; select the top 20% best and worst examples as $`\mathbf{y}_{w}`$ and $`\mathbf{y}_{l}`$ respectively. For simplicity, we only use SPK_SIM to rank these examples.

We evaluate A2 and B2 by every 50 updates, the results are in Fig.LABEL:. It is clear that B2 consistently outperforms the baseline and A2 in all three metrics. We further compare the win rate³³3 Win rate is the ratio that $`{r_{\phi}{(\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y}_{w})}} > {r_{\phi}{(\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y}_{l})}}`$, which is usually used to monitor the progress of the optimization problem in Eq.[4](https://arxiv.org/html/2409.12403v1#S2.E4 "In II-B Preference Alignment ‣ II Preference Alignment on Language Model-Based TTS ‣ Preference Alignment Improves Language Model-Based TTS Jinchuan and Jiatong are interns at Tencent AI LAB during this work. Chunlei Zhang is the corresponding author. Code will be released in ESPnet."). of A2 and B2. As suggested in Fig.LABEL:, the win rate reached 99.9% only after 20 updates, which indicates that there is a trivial difference between the natural speech and generated speech in discrete space, making the model less explore the features that can improve the model performance. By contrast, since both $`\mathbf{y}_{w}`$ and $`\mathbf{y}_{l}`$ are generated in B2, the optimization is non-trivial and provides better performance.

#### III-B2 Hyper-Parameter Search

Based on A2 and B2, we extend to A1 and B1 with $`\beta = 1`$; A3 and B3 with $`\beta = 0.01`$. Fig.LABEL: suggests that the results achieved by 300 updates are nearly optimal, so we only evaluate the models with the same number of updates. The results are in Fig.LABEL:.

As A1, A2, A3 consistently under-performs B1, B2, B3, we proceed with both $`\mathbf{y}_{w}`$ and $`\mathbf{y}_{l}`$ being generated. B3 outperforms B1, B2 consistently, so we proceed with $`\beta = 0.01`$.

#### III-B3 Length Normalization

It is mentioned in \[seedtts\] that standard DPO will lengthen the generated examples while \[simpo\] mentioned that length normalization can be used for regularization. So we applied length normalization to all posteriors in Eq.[6](https://arxiv.org/html/2409.12403v1#S2.E6 "In II-B Preference Alignment ‣ II Preference Alignment on Language Model-Based TTS ‣ Preference Alignment Improves Language Model-Based TTS Jinchuan and Jiatong are interns at Tencent AI LAB during this work. Chunlei Zhang is the corresponding author. Code will be released in ESPnet.") and did experiments C1-C3 with $`\beta = {\{ 1,0.1,0.01\}}`$. The results are in Fig.LABEL:.

We find that DPO without length normalization B3 lengthens the generated samples by x% w.r.t the ground truth, while that number for C3 is reduced to x%. The DPO becomes robust to $`\beta`$ choice when length normalization is applied. Finally, DPO with length normalization can still improve the baseline, but all under-perform B3. So we proceed without length normalization.

### III-C Metric Selection

So far we only selected the preference pairs by SPK_SIM metric. We then change the metric to Proxy MOS (D1) and WER (D2). Additionally, we combine the ranking results of SPK_SIM, Proxy MOS, and WER in a naive way ⁴⁴4 With each metric, we rank all examples and assign scores from 0 to 9, lower is better. Examples with lower overall scores are preferred. (D3). The results are in Fig.LABEL:.

In B3, D1, D2, the optimal values of each metric are achieved when the corresponding metric is selected to form the preference pairs, which is reasonable as that metric is more emphasized during the data curation. Additionally, applying any metric to the data curation will consistently optimize the model under the other two metrics, which suggests there is a positive correlation between these metrics during data curation. Combining all metrics together, D3 achieves significant and balanced improvement on all three metrics, so we proceed with D3.

### III-D Supervised Fine-Tuning

It is a common practice for the pre-trained model to experience supervised fine-tuning (SFT), usually with high-quality data, before the PA training stage. We then fine-tune the baseline model on the $`\text{y}_{w}`$ of D3 for one epoch, with the same learning schedule as in Sec.[III-A](https://arxiv.org/html/2409.12403v1#S3.SS1 "III-A Experimental Setup ‣ III Experiments ‣ Preference Alignment Improves Language Model-Based TTS Jinchuan and Jiatong are interns at Tencent AI LAB during this work. Chunlei Zhang is the corresponding author. Code will be released in ESPnet.") (E1). The results are in Fig.LABEL:. It indicates that applying this SFT training to the baseline model with provide marginal improvement before and after DPO training. For simplicity, we proceed without this SFT stage.

### III-E Label Efficiency

Our DPO training leverages the full LibriSpeech training set, which is overly abundant compared with the preference alignment training in text LLM. We then reduce the training data volume to {100, 10, 1} hours. We conduct experiment with two setups. F1-F3: reduce the batch size to 10% of the original but keep the number of updates unchanged; F4-F6: keep both batch size and number of updates unchanged. This change means the data will be used for more than one epoch in F2-F6.

### III-F Iterative Optimization

So far all DPO experiments are based on preference pairs generated by the baseline model, which can be sub-optimal since the model has been changed during optimization (offline policy optimization ). We then iteratively train the models by the preference pairs generated from the DPO-trained model in the last iteration. We continue this process 3 times, using LibriSpeech Train-Clean-100 for the cost reason.

### III-G Out-of-Domain performance

Although all DPO training is done with LibriSpeech, we show that the improvement achieved by DPO can be generalized to other data domains that are unseen in DPO (GigaSpeech) or both baseline training and DPO (VCTK). We examine D3 on 500 randomly selected examples from GigaSpeech and VCTK test sets. The results are in Fig.LABEL:.

Our preference metrics are based on three specific pre-trained models. However, we show that the DPO training improves the TTS model in a general sense, rather than simply over-fit on these models. Thus, we adopt OWSM v3.1-base for WER, ? for SPK_SIM and DNSMOS for Proxy MOS, to the baseline and D3. The results are in Fig.LABEL:.

### III-H Other Preference Alignment Methods

Besides DPO, we also examine other preference alignment objectives with the same setup of D3. We search the hyper-parameters of these objectives and then report the results in Table. LABEL:.

### III-I Summary

### III-J Human Evaluation

We conduct back-by-back human evaluation between the baseline and E1. 30 utterances are randomly selected from the Test-Clean dataset and are evaluated by ? native English speaker.

## IV Related Works
