---
arxiv_id: "2409.09352"
title: "MacST: Multi-Accent Speech Synthesis via Text Transliteration for Accent Conversion"
authors:
  - Sho Inoue
  - Shuai Wang
  - Wanxing Wang
  - Pengcheng Zhu
  - Mengxiao Bi
  - Haizhou Li
submitted: "2024-09-14"
categories:
  - cs.SD
  - eess.AS
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.09352
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 0/38
citations_resolved_at: "2026-07-07T16:11:09+00:00"
references_parsed: 38
arxiv_version: ""
---

<div class="IEEEkeywords">

Accent Voice Generation, Accent Voice Conversion, Transliteration, Multi-lingual Text-to-Speech

</div>

# Introduction

Despite much progress in expressive speech generation, many challenges remain in accent speech generation. Supervised learning effectively aligns phonetic and prosodic features across accents that relies on parallel corpus. One of the major challenges is the scarcity of accent-varied parallel speech corpus since multi-accent speakers are hard to come by . Therefore, it is common to create parallel corpus by synthesizing target speech using Voice Conversion (VC)   or text-to-speech (TTS) . However, these techniques also depend on accented speech corpus and often face speaker entanglement issues.

Recent advancements in TTS technologies and Large Language Models (LLMs) open up new possibilities. Multi-lingual TTS systems have achieved significant progress, now producing speech that closely mirrors human-like naturalness across various languages . In parallel, LLMs have revolutionized text generation tasks. Initially, generating high-quality text was a time-consuming process and required specialized knowledge . However, with the advent of LLMs , these tasks have become more efficient and accessible. We apply these developments to generate a parallel dataset for accent conversion.

In this study, we introduce a novel method for generating a multi-accent speech samples via text transliteration. In practice, we first convert text from one language to another while maintaining the phonetic equivalence. Table <a href="#tab:transliteration" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:transliteration">[tab:transliteration]</a> illustrates transliterated examples of the word “accent” across three languages. The transliteration is done by Large Language Models (LLMs). The transliterated text is subsequently taken by a multilingual TTS model to synthesize the accented English speech. As phonetic variation represents the main signature of an accent , this process allows us to effectively construct a parallel accent dataset that varies solely in accent.

<span id="tab:transliteration" label="tab:transliteration"></span>

This study is motivated to create accented English speech without the need to involve human speakers, therefore avoiding the issue of English proficiency of speakers . Unlike other traditional paired data generation methods, such as speaker voice conversion (VC), the multi-accent speech synthesis via text transliteration method, i.e. MacST, offers unique benefits:

- _Phonetic variation via transliteration_: MacST directly varies the phonemes across accents without depending on spoken samples, which avoids entanglement between speaker and accent.

- _Generalization of linguistic content_: Unlike VC-augmented methods, which are restricted to linguistic content from existing speech samples and thus unable to handle low-resource English accents, MacST is applicable to any English sentence.

In short, we are seeking a speech generation method that is simple, scalable, and applicable to general accent conversion studies. The contributions of this work can be summarized as follows:

- We introduce the first approach utilizing transliteration to construct a parallel accent dataset. we can enhance accent intensity by modeling the absence of specific English phonemes in the first language.

- Analysis of our dataset confirms the effectiveness of our method in generating accented speech from both native and non-native English speakers, intensifying the latter’s accents.

- Experimental results demonstrate that our synthetic parallel dataset significantly enhances the performance of accent voice conversion systems.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section II, we introduce related works. Section III describes our proposed methodology. In Section IV, we introduce our experiment setup. In Section V, we validate our work with experimental results and analysis. Section VI concludes our study. We placed speech demos, transliterated texts, and training datasets on the project page[^5].

<figure id="fig:diagram" data-latex-placement="ht">
<embed src="images/diagram.pdf" style="width:15cm" />
<figcaption>Overall diagram of the MacST pipeline: The system first generates transliterated text from the input, which is then fed into multi-lingual TTS models to synthesize accented speech. Red texts denote our proposed system’s input data (English Text, Target Language, and Speaker Information). </figcaption>
</figure>

# Related Works

## Accent Speech Dataset

Numerous datasets featuring accented English speech have been made available for various speech processing applications. The Edinburgh Dataset  offers 40 hours of phone conversation recordings from native English speakers with diverse accents, designed primarily for automatic speech recognition tasks. The VCTK dataset  is tailored for text-to-speech synthesis (TTS) and includes 109 native English speakers from different regions, such as the US and the UK. GLOBE  is a large-scale multi-speaker TTS dataset that contains over 20,000 speakers and 150 accents, including non-native speakers like Europeans and Asians. Finally, the combination of L2-ARCTIC  and CMU-ARCTIC  contain both native and non-native speakers, sharing identical transcriptions to construct parallel datasets. However, _each speaker is restricted to a single accent._

## Accent Conversion

The studies on accent conversion can be summarized into two categories according to the use of speech corpus.

### Synthetic Parallel Corpus

The first direction is to synthesize audio to create parallel data for accent conversion. They generate native-like speech from non-native English speakers, or accented speech from native speakers via voice conversion (VC) . For example, a study  explores three ground-truth-free methods for accent conversion including synthesizing data from VC. Other approaches  include training speech generation models only on a specific accent to produce accented speech across various speakers. However, these methods often encounter speaker entanglement issues and restrict their application to existing accented corpora.

### Non-Parallel Corpus

Accent conversion can be achieved using non-parallel datasets. Techniques involve training a decoder solely on the target speaking style, thereby eliminating the need for native accent speech during conversion . Accentron employs speaker/accent encoders trained with speaker/accent classification tasks . Also, through adversarial learning, some studies facilitate many-to-many accent conversion in Chinese  and English . It is generally believed that supervised learning on parallel corpus is also more effective than unsupervised learning on non-parallel corpus.

In this paper, we study a novel way to automatically construct accent-parallel speech corpus. This corpus will facilitate the alignment of phonetic and prosodic features across accents, thereby simplifying the training process.

# MacST Method

## Overall Pipeline

We designed a text-to-speech synthesis pipeline that takes text, accent ID, and speaker information as input and generate accented speech as output via accent-transliterated text, as outlined in Fig. <a href="#fig:diagram" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:diagram">1</a>. The process comprises two main steps: transliteration through Large Language Models (LLMs) and speech synthesis using a multi-lingual Text-to-Speech (TTS) model. This method notably applies across different speakers, accents, and transcriptions, allowing for extensive speech sample generation.

<figure id="fig:llm_prompt" data-latex-placement="!htb">
<div class="AIbox">
<p><span>English Text: Let’s go; Accent: Japanese</span></p>
<p><span><strong>Prompt:</strong></span><br />
Can you provide me with three Japanese words to represent the phoneme sequences delimited by triple backticks. For example, in Japanese, “Trail ()” is expected to have Japanese representation of “</p>
<div class="CJK">
<p><span>UTF8</span><span>min</span>トレイル”</p>
</div>
<p>; where “”’ in phonemes represents the stress point of the word. Here, your task is to provide me with three Japanese words that can replace the phoneme sequences, delimited by triple backticks. Please focus on phonetically similar characters instead of similar characters in terms of the meaning. The expected output should be in JSON format. You can first list three possible choices of the words and then re-order them in order of the similarity of the pronunciation.<br />
The following is the example in Hindi language.<br />
<span class="math inline">[</span>Few Shot Examples<span class="math inline">]</span><br />
<br />
Let’s:<br />
 go:<br />
<br />
Again, the responses should be in a JSON format and sort them in order of the similarity to each phoneme sequence.<br />
{<br />
“Let’s”: {<br />
“phonemes”: “”,<br />
“choices”: <span class="math inline">[</span>1st choices of Japanese characters, 2nd choices of Japanese characters, 3rd choices of Japanese characters<span class="math inline">]</span>,<br />
“similarity order”: <span class="math inline">[</span>1st most similar Japanese characters, 2nd most similar Japanese characters, 3rd most similar Japanese characters<span class="math inline">]</span>,<br />
},<br />
“go”: {<br />
“phonemes”: “”,<br />
“choices”: <span class="math inline">[</span>1st choices of Japanese characters, 2nd choices of Japanese characters, 3rd choices of Japanese characters<span class="math inline">]</span>,<br />
“similarity order”: <span class="math inline">[</span>1st most similar Japanese characters, 2nd most similar Japanese characters, 3rd most similar Japanese characters<span class="math inline">]</span>,<br />
},<br />
} <span><strong>Expected Response</strong></span>:<br />
{<br />
“Let’s”: {<br />
“phonemes”: “”,<br />
“choices”: [“</p>
<div class="CJK">
<p><span>UTF8</span><span>min</span>レツ</p>
</div>
<p>”, “</p>
<div class="CJK">
<p><span>UTF8</span><span>min</span>レッツ</p>
</div>
<p>”, “</p>
<div class="CJK">
<p><span>UTF8</span><span>min</span>レテス</p>
</div>
<p>”],<br />
“similarity order”: [“</p>
<div class="CJK">
<p><span>UTF8</span><span>min</span>レッツ</p>
</div>
<p>”, “</p>
<div class="CJK">
<p><span>UTF8</span><span>min</span>レツ</p>
</div>
<p>”, “</p>
<div class="CJK">
<p><span>UTF8</span><span>min</span>レテス</p>
</div>
<p>”]<br />
},<br />
“go”: {<br />
“phonemes”: “”,<br />
“choices”: [“</p>
<div class="CJK">
<p><span>UTF8</span><span>min</span>ゴー</p>
</div>
<p>”, “</p>
<div class="CJK">
<p><span>UTF8</span><span>min</span>ゴウ</p>
</div>
<p>”, “</p>
<div class="CJK">
<p><span>UTF8</span><span>min</span>ゴ</p>
</div>
<p>”],<br />
“similarity order”: [“</p>
<div class="CJK">
<p><span>UTF8</span><span>min</span>ゴー</p>
</div>
<p>”, “</p>
<div class="CJK">
<p><span>UTF8</span><span>min</span>ゴウ</p>
</div>
<p>”, “</p>
<div class="CJK">
<p><span>UTF8</span><span>min</span>ゴ</p>
</div>
<p>”]<br />
}<br />
} <span><strong>Transliterated Text:</strong></span></p>
<div class="CJK">
<p><span>UTF8</span><span>min</span>レッツ ゴー</p>
</div>
<p>.</p>
</div>
<figcaption> Examples of the transliteration process: The prompt of LLM and the expected response. Example responses are placed in <span class="math inline">[</span>Few Shot Examples<span class="math inline">]</span>. </figcaption>
</figure>

## Transliteration by Large Language Model

We utilized Large Language Models (LLMs) to obtain the transliterated text from the provided English text. We show the sample prompt and the expected response of the English text “Let’s go” in Fig. <a href="#fig:llm_prompt" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:llm_prompt">2</a>. We constructed a prompt for the LLM to transliterate the English sentence at the word level, associating each word with a phoneme sequence. This method is supported by research suggesting that the inclusion of both graphemes and phonemes enhances transliteration accuracy . We designed the prompt to provide three transliteration candidates per word, then sorted by similarity. We include a few transliterated samples to prevent LLM from _translating_ samples. We executed this prompt six times, three with GPT-3.5 Turbo  and three with GPT-4o . We calculated the frequency of each transliterated word, assigning higher scores to those with similar representations. Concurrently, we obtained transliterations for articles like “the” and “a/an” since their pronunciations vary depending on the subsequent word. We then concatenated the top-scoring transliterations, adding commas and periods to form complete sentences representing the original English text.

## Speech Generation via Multi-lingual TTS

We integrate a multi-lingual Text-to-Speech (TTS) system capable of handling multiple target languages. This system, provided by 11Elevenlabs[^6], employs the Eleven Multilingual v2 model, which supports 29 languages. It generates speech from the transliterated text and speaker information, producing accented English speech specific to the chosen speaker. The model is conditioned on the speaker using audio recordings from a speaker and conditioned on language using transcription rather than a language ID. Therefore, our approach is effective for languages with characters distinct from English, such as Hindi, Korean, Japanese, and Mandarin.

# Experiment Setup

We developed a sequence-to-sequence voice conversion model on an accented parallel corpus generated by MacST.

## Voice Conversion Model Configuration

Following , we employ Voice Transformer Network (VTN)  as a sequence-to-sequence model for accent voice conversion. This model adopts a standard encoder-decoder architecture comprising 12 Transformer encoder blocks and 6 decoder blocks , with model dimensions set at 768, feed-forward network (FFN) inner dimensions at 3,072, and 12 attention heads. We used mel-spectrograms for both input and output acoustic features. For waveform synthesis, we trained the HiFiGAN[^7]  vocoder on LibriTTS-R  and ARCTIC datasets , which was sampled at 16kHz and featured a 80-dimensional mel-spectrogram, aligning with CMU-ARCTIC.

To enhance training stability, we implemented a two-stage pretraining strategy from VTN , focusing sequentially on the decoder and encoder. Initially, the model learns to convert linguistic representations into mel-spectrograms. Unlike the text tokens used in , we used Hubert discrete tokens , extracting continuous features from Hubert Base[^8], which we then discretize using k-means clustering into 500 clusters, eliminating repetitive tokens. In the second stage, we replaced the input with a mel-spectrogram, while maintaining and freezing the decoder’s parameters from the initial stage and training only the encoder. Then, for accent conversion, we initialized the system with parameters from the second stage and fine-tuned using a parallel dataset to adapt to different accents.

We trained the model across three stages: initially, the pretraining phase involved 200,000 steps; followed by a second pretraining stage of 50,000 steps; and finally, the accent conversion stage, comprising 100,000 steps. Batch sizes were set at 8 for the first stage and 64 for the latter two. Apart from these modifications, we adhered to the same training configuration as VTN[^9].

## Dataset

Four speech datasets were involved in this paper. L2-ARCTIC  and CMU-ARCTIC  were employed to generate samples from MacST for dataset analysis. For accent voice conversion experiments, we used CMU-ARCTIC, LibriTTS-R , and VCTK .

L2-ARCTIC  includes English speech recordings from 24 non-native speakers with six backgrounds such as Hindi and Korean. All speakers share the same script, each offering one hour of speech in a single accent. We also employed CMU-ARCTIC , a native version of L2-ARCTIC. For accent conversion, we selected an American speaker from CMU-ARCTIC and divided 1,132 transcriptions into 932 for training, 100 for validation, and 100 for testing. Utilizing both ARCTIC datasets, we created speech samples via MacST for dataset analysis and to build a parallel dataset, as outlined in Section <a href="#sec-experiments" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec-experiments">5</a>.

In our accent voice conversion experiments, we utilized several datasets including CMU-ARCTIC, LibriTTS-R  and VCTK . For pre-training, we used LibriTTS-R , a multi-speaker dataset with approximately 580 hours from 2,306 speakers, specifically employing “train-clean-100” and “train-clean-360” subsets for training. For training conversion models, we mainly used the parallel dataset constructed by MacST from CMU-ARCTIC. Additionally, we used transcriptions from VCTK  to test data augmentation, extracting transcriptions with fewer than 15 words and selecting 4500 of them (around 3 hours) to synthesize pairs of American and Hindi accented speech via MacST. This confirmed the usability of our synthetic data in data augmentation practices.

<div class="table*">

</div>

## Evaluation Metrics

We evaluated our results against two metrics: speech quality and accentedness. We conducted listening tests with 20 evaluators, each 10 participants familiar with either Korean or Hindi accents.

**(1) Speech Quality**: We evaluated speech quality through both subjective and objective methods. Subjectively, we conducted a MUSHRA test in which evaluators rated each audio sample on a scale from 0 to 100, focusing on whether the speech sounded as if it were spoken by humans, explicitly disregarding accents or background noise. Objectively, we used Word Error Rate (WER), employing Whisper[^10]  to predict the transcription of the synthesized audio.

**(2) Accentedness**: Accentedness assesses the prominence of the accent in speech. Subjectively, we conducted a MUSHRA test, where evaluators rated each audio sample based on the strength of the accent. Objectively, we utilized a pretrained accent detector[^11]  to determine the classification probability of Hindi accents. We evaluated the effectiveness of accent conversion using synthetic speech from MacST. Using the pretrained accent classifier, we extracted accent embeddings from three samples: converted speech from the accent conversion process, accented samples, and American samples from MacST. We computed the cosine similarity for accent embeddings (AECS) of the accented and the American speech samples toward the converted speech. We then analyzed the difference of these similarities, such as $`(\text{AECS}_{\text{accented}}-\text{AECS}_{\text{native}})`$. A higher AECS difference indicates better accent alignment between the converted speech and the accented speech.

**(3) Speaker Similarity**: We evaluated the speaker perseverance of our conversion models using Speaker Encoding Cosine Similarity (SECS), employing Resemblyzer[^12] for speaker embedding extraction. We computed SECS using ground-truth source audio from the American speaker (SLT).

# Experiments and Results

## MacST: Dataset Analysis

We assessed the quality of generated speech from MacST against existing datasets. We focused on four speakers from L2-ARCTIC: _ASI_ (Hindi male), _TNI_ (Hindi female), _HKK_ (Korean male), and _YDCK_ (Korean female), along with _SLT_ (American female) from CMU-ARCTIC. We generated speech samples in seven styles using MacST, employing 100 transcriptions from the ARCTIC datasets’ test split. We used MacST on non-native speakers (_ASI_, _TNI_, _HKK_, _YDCK_) to test accent enhancement abilities by modifying their linguistic content through transliteration. We also synthesized accented speeches in American, Hindi, and Korean using speech prompts from the American speaker (_SLT_) to evaluate our method’s accented speech generation capabilities. Such speech prompts provide the speaker condition for the multi-lingual TTS system.

Table <a href="#table:result_analysis" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:result_analysis">[table:result_analysis]</a> displays MUSHRA tests in terms of speech naturalness and accentedness from two listening groups familiar with Hindi and Korean accents in the upper and the lower sections, respectively. In MacST, the languages in brackets indicate the transliteration languages. Notably, accented speakers with transliterated texts, such as “MacST (ASI/Hindi)” and “MacST (HKK/Korean)”, outperform other cases, suggesting MacST’s efficacy in accentuating non-native speakers’ accents. When comparing to native English speaker (SLT) results, transliterated texts show heightened accentedness; In the Hindi group, it is hightened from 9.56 to 51.61 and in the Korean group, it is from 6.90 to 77.63. It underscores MacST’s ability to accentuate even the native English speaker.

In the Hindi accent group, speech naturalness is consistent across speakers. However, in the Korean group, we observed a slight degradation in speech naturalness, likely due to overly intense accentuation, as indicated by the accentedness score, which is twice as high. To mitigate this, we could reduce the accent intensity, potentially by incorporating some English phonemes in multi-lingual speech generation with a universal multi-lingual tokenizer, for instance.

## Accent Conversion (American-to-Hindi conversion)

We developed an accent conversion model to transform American-accented speech into Hindi-accented speech, utilizing an American English speaker’s input from CMU-ARCTIC. We trained the models using American-Hindi speech sample pairs. Using MacST, we generated speech samples from 1,132 ARCTIC dataset transcriptions and 4,500 transcriptions from the VCTK dataset. We evaluated two models: the first employed paired data, combining CMU-ARCTIC’s ground-truth input with MacST’s synthetic Hindi-accented output. The second model added synthetic pairs, including 932 samples (approximately 1 hour) from ARCTIC and 4,500 samples (about 3 hours) from VCTK to test MacST’s data augmentation efficacy.

Besides MUSHRA tests, we conducted objective evaluations to assess speech quality, accentedness, and speaker similarity. For speech quality, we measured Word Error Rate (WER). For accentedness, we utilized classification probability and Accent Encoding Cosine Similarity (AECS) difference. For speaker similarity, we used Speaker Encoding Cosine Similarity (SECS).

Table <a href="#table:result_conversion" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:result_conversion">[table:result_conversion]</a> presents subjective and objective scores. SECS results confirm the consistent speaker characteristics between the source and converted audio, underscoring our method’s effectiveness in maintaining speaker traits. Other results highlight that accent conversion significantly increased accentedness across all metrics, from “Ground-Truth (SLT/American)” to “AC” results. Additionally, data augmentation notably enhanced the conversion results in speech quality and accentedness, underscoring the effectiveness of our method in training accent conversion models.

# Conclusion

We introduce MacST, an approach for generating parallel datasets for accented speech via text transliteration. Our method employs Large Language Models (LLMs) to derive transliterated texts, which are then input into multilingual Text-to-Speech (TTS) models to synthesize accented English speech. Dataset analysis confirms MacST’s capacity to amplify accents in native and non-native English speakers by highlighting the absence of certain English phonemes in native non-English languages. Both subjective and objective evaluations of the accent conversion validate the efficacy of our method in training accent conversion models.

[^1]: Work was done when Sho Inoue was doing an internship at NetEase

[^2]: Sho Inoue: shoinoue@link.cuhk.edu.cn

[^3]: $`\dag`$ Correspondence to Shuai Wang: wangshuai@cuhk.edu.cn

[^4]: The research is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 62271432); Shenzhen Science and Technology Program ZDSYS20230626091302006; and CCF-NetEase ThunderFire Innovation Research Funding (No. CCF-Netease 202302).

[^5]: **Project Page**: <https://github.com/shinshoji01/MacST-project-page>

[^6]: 11Elevenlabs: <https://elevenlabs.io/>

[^7]: HiFiGAN: <https://github.com/jik876/hifi-gan>

[^8]: Hubert Base: <https://huggingface.co/facebook/hubert-base-ls960>

[^9]: VTN: <https://github.com/unilight/seq2seq-vc>

[^10]: Whisper Large: <https://github.com/openai/whisper>

[^11]: <https://huggingface.co/Jzuluaga/accent-id-commonaccent_xlsr-en-english>

[^12]: Resemblyzer: <https://github.com/resemble-ai/Resemblyzer>

## References

1. Linhan Ma, Yongmao Zhang, Xinfa Zhu, Yi~Lei, Ziqian Ning, Pengcheng Zhu, and Lei Xie,
   \newblock ``Accent-vits:accent transfer for end-to-end tts,'' 2023.
2. Wen-Chin Huang and Tomoki Toda,
   \newblock ``Evaluating methods for ground-truth-free foreign accent conversion,'' 2023.
3. Philip Anastassiou, Zhenyu Tang, Kainan Peng, Dongya Jia, Jiaxin Li, Ming Tu, Yuping Wang, Yuxuan Wang, and Mingbo Ma,
   \newblock ``Voiceshop: A unified speech-to-speech framework for identity-preserving zero-shot voice editing,'' 2024.
4. Tuan~Nam Nguyen, Ngoc-Quan Pham, and Alexander Waibel,
   \newblock ``{Accent Conversion using Pre-trained Model and Synthesized Data from Voice Conversion},''
   \newblock in {\em Proc. Interspeech 2022}, 2022, pp. 2583--2587.
5. Georgi Tinchev, Marta Czarnowska, Kamil Deja, Kayoko Yanagisawa, and Marius Cotescu,
   \newblock ``Modelling low-resource accents without accent-specific tts frontend,''
   \newblock in {\em ICASSP 2023 - 2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, 2023, pp. 1--5.
6. Lev Finkelstein, Heiga Zen, Norman Casagrande, Chun an~Chan, Ye~Jia, Tom Kenter, Alexey Petelin, Jonathan Shen, Vincent Wan, Yu~Zhang, Yonghui Wu, and Rob Clark,
   \newblock ``Training text-to-speech systems from synthetic data: A practical approach for accent transfer tasks,'' 2022.
7. Edresson Casanova, Kelly Davis, Eren Gölge, Görkem Göknar, Iulian Gulea, Logan Hart, Aya Aljafari, Joshua Meyer, Reuben Morais, Samuel Olayemi, and Julian Weber,
   \newblock ``Xtts: a massively multilingual zero-shot text-to-speech model,'' 2024.
8. Edresson Casanova, Julian Weber, Christopher~Dane Shulby, Arnaldo~C{\^a}ndido J{\'u}nior, Eren G{\"o}lge, and Moacir~Antonelli Ponti,
   \newblock ``Yourtts: Towards zero-shot multi-speaker tts and zero-shot voice conversion for everyone,''
   \newblock in {\em International Conference on Machine Learning}, 2021.
9. Ziyue Jiang, Jinglin Liu, Yi~Ren, Jinzheng He, Shengpeng Ji, Chen Zhang, Zhe Ye, Pengfei Wei, Chunfeng Wang, Xiang Yin, Zejun Ma, and Zhou Zhao,
   \newblock ``Mega-tts 2: Boosting prompting mechanisms for zero-shot speech synthesis,''
   \newblock in {\em International Conference on Learning Representations}, 2023.
10. Zi-Hua Zhang, Long Zhou, Chengyi Wang, Sanyuan Chen, Yu~Wu, Shujie Liu, Zhuo Chen, Yanqing Liu, Huaming Wang, Jinyu Li, Lei He, Sheng Zhao, and Furu Wei,
    \newblock ``Speak foreign languages with your own voice: Cross-lingual neural codec language modeling,''
    \newblock {\em ArXiv}, vol. abs/2303.03926, 2023.
11. Kevin Knight and Jonathan Graehl,
    \newblock ``Machine transliteration,''
    \newblock {\em Computational linguistics}, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 599--612, 1998.
12. Sarvnaz Karimi, Falk Scholer, and Andrew Turpin,
    \newblock ``Machine transliteration survey,''
    \newblock {\em ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR)}, vol. 43, pp. 1 -- 46, 2011.
13. Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu~Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll~L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke~E. Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul~Francis Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan~J. Lowe,
    \newblock ``Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback,''
    \newblock {\em ArXiv}, vol. abs/2203.02155, 2022.
14. OpenAI,
    \newblock ``Gpt-4 technical report,''
    \newblock 2023.
15. Alison Behrman,
    \newblock ``Segmental and prosodic approaches to accent management,''
    \newblock {\em American journal of speech-language pathology / American Speech-Language-Hearing Association}, vol. 23, 03 2014.
16. James Flege,
    \newblock {\em Second language speech learning: Theory, findings and problems}, pp. 229--273,
    \newblock 01 1995.
17. Guanlong {Zhao}, Sinem {Sonsaat}, Alif {Silpachai}, Ivana {Lucic}, Evgeny {Chukharev-Hudilainen}, John {Levis}, and Ricardo {Gutierrez-Osuna},
    \newblock ``L2-arctic: A non-native english speech corpus,''
    \newblock in {\em Proc. Interspeech}, 2018, p. 2783–2787.
18. Ramon Sanabria, Nikolay Bogoychev, Nina Markl, Andrea Carmantini, Ondrej Klejch, and Peter Bell,
    \newblock ``The edinburgh international accents of english corpus: Towards the democratization of english asr,'' 2023.
19. Christophe Veaux, Junichi Yamagishi, and Kirsten MacDonald,
    \newblock ``Cstr vctk corpus: English multi-speaker corpus for cstr voice cloning toolkit,'' [sound], 2017.
20. Wenbin Wang, Yang Song, and Sanjay Jha,
    \newblock ``Globe: A high-quality english corpus with global accents for zero-shot speaker adaptive text-to-speech,'' 2024.
21. John Kominek and Alan~W. Black,
    \newblock ``The cmu arctic speech databases,''
    \newblock in {\em Speech Synthesis Workshop}, 2004.
22. Guanlong Zhao, Shaojin Ding, and Ricardo Gutierrez-Osuna,
    \newblock ``Converting foreign accent speech without a reference,''
    \newblock {\em IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing}, vol. 29, pp. 2367--2381, 2021.
23. Songxiang Liu, Disong Wang, Yuewen Cao, Lifa Sun, Xixin Wu, Shiyin Kang, Zhiyong Wu, Xunying Liu, Dan Su, Dong Yu, and Helen Meng,
    \newblock ``End-to-end accent conversion without using native utterances,''
    \newblock in {\em ICASSP 2020 - 2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, 2020, pp. 6289--6293.
24. Xi~Chen, Jiakun Pei, Liumeng Xue, and Mingyang Zhang,
    \newblock ``Transfer the linguistic representations from tts to accent conversion with non-parallel data,'' 2024.
25. Waris Quamer, Anurag Das, John~M. Levis, Evgeny Chukharev-Hudilainen, and Ricardo Gutierrez-Osuna,
    \newblock ``Zero-shot foreign accent conversion without a native reference,''
    \newblock in {\em Interspeech}, 2022.
26. Shaojin Ding, Guanlong Zhao, and Ricardo Gutierrez-Osuna,
    \newblock ``Accentron: Foreign accent conversion to arbitrary non-native speakers using zero-shot learning,''
    \newblock {\em Computer Speech \& Language}, vol. 72, pp. 101302, 2022.
27. Zhichao Wang, Wenshuo Ge, Xiong Wang, Shan Yang, Wendong Gan, Haitao Chen, Hai Li, Lei Xie, and Xiulin Li,
    \newblock ``Accent and speaker disentanglement in many-to-many voice conversion,''
    \newblock in {\em 2021 12th International Symposium on Chinese Spoken Language Processing (ISCSLP)}, 2021, pp. 1--5.
28. Mumin Jin, Prashant Serai, Jilong Wu, Andros Tjandra, Vimal Manohar, and Qing He,
    \newblock ``Voice-preserving zero-shot multiple accent conversion,''
    \newblock in {\em ICASSP 2023 - 2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, 2023, pp. 1--5.
29. Mahima Yadav, Ishan Kumar, and Ayush Kumar,
    \newblock ``Different models of transliteration - a comprehensive review,''
    \newblock in {\em 2023 International Conference on Innovative Data Communication Technologies and Application (ICIDCA)}, 2023, pp. 356--363.
30. {OpenAI},
    \newblock ``gpt-3.5-turbo-1106,'' Online, 2022,
    \newblock Available from: \url{https://platform.openai.com/docs/models}.
31. {OpenAI},
    \newblock ``gpt-4o-2024-05-13,'' Online, 2023,
    \newblock Available from: \url{https://platform.openai.com/docs/models}.
32. Wen-Chin Huang, Tomoki Hayashi, Yi-Chiao Wu, Hirokazu Kameoka, and Tomoki Toda,
    \newblock ``Voice transformer network: Sequence-to-sequence voice conversion using transformer with text-to-speech pretraining,'' 2019.
33. Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan~N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin,
    \newblock ``Attention is all you need,''
    \newblock {\em CoRR}, vol. abs/1706.03762, 2017.
34. Jungil Kong, Jaehyeon Kim, and Jaekyoung Bae,
    \newblock ``Hifi-gan: Generative adversarial networks for efficient and high fidelity speech synthesis,''
    \newblock {\em CoRR}, vol. abs/2010.05646, 2020.
35. Yuma Koizumi, Heiga Zen, Shigeki Karita, Yifan Ding, Kohei Yatabe, Nobuyuki Morioka, Michiel Bacchiani, Yu~Zhang, Wei Han, and Ankur Bapna,
    \newblock ``Libritts-r: A restored multi-speaker text-to-speech corpus,'' 2023.
36. Wei{-}Ning Hsu, Benjamin Bolte, Yao{-}Hung~Hubert Tsai, Kushal Lakhotia, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Abdelrahman Mohamed,
    \newblock ``Hubert: Self-supervised speech representation learning by masked prediction of hidden units,''
    \newblock {\em CoRR}, vol. abs/2106.07447, 2021.
37. Alec Radford, Jong~Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine McLeavey, and Ilya Sutskever,
    \newblock ``Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision,'' 2022.
38. Juan Zuluaga-Gomez, Sara Ahmed, Danielius Visockas, and Cem Subakan,
    \newblock ``Commonaccent: Exploring large acoustic pretrained models for accent classification based on common voice,'' 2023.
