---
arxiv_id: "2005.08781"
title: "Defending Your Voice: Adversarial Attack on Voice Conversion"
authors:
  - Chien-yu Huang
  - Yist Y. Lin
  - Hung-yi Lee
  - Lin-shan Lee
submitted: "2020-05-18"
categories:
  - eess.AS
  - cs.LG
  - cs.SD
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.08781
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 0/39
citations_resolved_at: "2026-07-07T16:47:18+00:00"
references_parsed: 39
arxiv_version: ""
---

<div class="keywords">

voice conversion, adversarial attack, speaker verification, speaker representation

</div>

# Introduction

Voice conversion aims to alter some specific acoustic characteristics of an utterance, such as the speaker identity, while preserving the linguistic content. These technologies were made much more powerful by deep learning , but the improved technologies also led to concerns about privacy and authentication. One’s identity may be counterfeited by voice conversion and exploited in improper ways, which is only one of the many deepfake problems observed today generated by deep learning, such as synthesized fake photos or fake voice. Detecting any of such artifacts or defending against such activities is thus increasingly important , which applies equally to voice conversion.

On the other hand, it has been widely known that neural networks are fragile in the presence of some specific noise, or prone to yield different or incorrect results if the input is disturbed by such subtle perturbations imperceptible to humans . Adversarial attack is to generate such subtle perturbations that can fool the neural networks. It has been successful on some discriminative models , but less reported on generative models .

In this paper, we propose to perform adversarial attack on voice conversion to prevent one’s speaker characteristics from being improperly utilized with voice conversion. Human-imperceptible perturbations are added to the utterances produced by the speaker to be defended. Three different approaches, the end-to-end attack, embedding attack, and feedback attack are proposed, such that the speaker characteristics of the converted utterances would be made very different from those of the defended speaker. We conducted objective and subjective evaluations on two recent state-of-the-art zero-shot voice conversion models. Objective speaker verification showed the converted utterances were significantly different from those produced by the defended speaker, which was then verified by subjective similarity test. The effectiveness of the proposed approaches was also verified for black-box attack via a proxy model closer to the real application scenario.

# Related works

## Voice conversion

Traditionally, parallel data are required for voice conversion, or the training utterances of the two speakers must be paired and aligned. To overcome this problem, Chou *et al.*  obtained disentangled representations respectively for linguistic content and speaker information with adversarial training; CycleGAN-VC used cycle-consistency to ensure the converted speech to be linguistically meaningful with the target speaker’s features; and StarGAN-VC introduced conditional input for many-to-many voice conversion. All these are limited to speakers seen in training.

Zero-shot approaches then tried to convert utterances to any speaker given only one example utterance without fine-tuning, and the target speaker is not necessarily seen before. Chou *et al.*  employed adaptive instance normalization for this purpose; <span class="smallcaps">AutoVC</span> integrated a pre-trained d-vector and an encoder bottleneck, achieving the state-of-the-art results.

## Attacking and defending voice

Automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems have been shown to be prone to adversarial attacks. Applying perturbations on the waveforms, spectrograms, or MFCC features was able to make ASR systems fail to recognize the speech correctly . Similar goals were achieved on speaker recognition by generating adversarial examples to fool automatic speaker verification (ASV) systems to predict that these examples had been uttered by a specific speaker . Different approaches for spoofing ASV were also proposed to show the vulnerabilities of such systems . But to our knowledge, applying adversarial attacks on voice conversion has not been reported yet.

On the other hand, many approaches were proposed to defend one’s voice when ASV systems were shown to be vulnerable to spoofing attacks . In addition to the ASVspoof challenges for spoofing techniques and countermeasures , Liu *et al.*  conducted adversarial attacks on those countermeasures, showing the fragility of them. Obviously, all neural network models are under the threat of adversarial attacks , which led to the idea of attacking voice conversion models as proposed here.

# Methodologies

<figure id="fig:diagram_of_methodologies" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="images/voice_conversion.pdf" />
<figcaption> The encoder-decoder based voice conversion model and the three proposed approaches. Perturbations are updated on the utterances providing speaker characteristics, as the blue dashed lines indicate. </figcaption>
</figure>

A widely used model for voice conversion adopted an encoder-decoder structure, in which the encoder is further divided into a content encoder and a speaker encoder, as shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:diagram_of_methodologies" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:diagram_of_methodologies">1</a>. This paper is also based on this model. The content encoder $`E_c`$ extracts the content information from an input utterance $`\bm{t}`$ yielding $`E_c(\bm{t})`$, while the speaker encoder $`E_s`$ embeds the speaker characteristics of an input utterance $`\bm{x}`$ as a latent vector $`E_s(\bm{x})`$, as in the left part of Fig. <a href="#fig:diagram_of_methodologies" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:diagram_of_methodologies">1</a>. Taking $`E_c(\bm{t})`$ and $`E_s(\bm{x})`$ as the input, the decoder $`D`$ generates a spectrogram $`F(\bm{t}, \bm{x})`$ with content information based on $`E_c(\bm{t})`$ and speaker characteristics based on $`E_s(\bm{x})`$.

Here we only focus on the utterances fed into the speaker encoder, since we are defending the speaker characteristics provided by such utterances. Motivated by the prior work , here we present three approaches to performing the attack, with the target being either the output spectrogram $`F(\bm{t}, \bm{x})`$ (Sec. <a href="#sec:e2e_attack" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:e2e_attack">3.1</a>), or the speaker embedding $`E_s(\bm{x})`$ (Sec. <a href="#sec:emb_attack" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:emb_attack">3.2</a>), or the combination of the two (Sec. <a href="#sec:feedback_attack" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:feedback_attack">3.3</a>), as shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:diagram_of_methodologies" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:diagram_of_methodologies">1</a>.

## End-to-end attack

A straight-forward approach to perform adversarial attack on the above model in Fig. <a href="#fig:diagram_of_methodologies" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:diagram_of_methodologies">1</a> is to take the decoder output $`F(\bm{t}, \bm{x})`$ as the target, referred to as end-to-end attack also shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:diagram_of_methodologies" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:diagram_of_methodologies">1</a>. Denote the original spectrogram of an utterance produced by the speaker to be defended as $`\bm{x} \in \mathbb{R}^{M \times T}`$ and the adversarial perturbation on $`\bm{x}`$ as $`\bm{\delta} \in \mathbb{R}^{M \times T}`$, where $`M`$ and $`T`$ are the total number of frequency components and time frames respectively. An untargeted attack simply aims to alter the output of the voice conversion model and can be expressed as:

```math
\begin{equation}
    \begin{aligned}
        & \underset{\bm{\delta}}{\text{maximize}} & & \mathcal{L}(F(\bm{t}, \bm{x} + \bm{\delta}), F(\bm{t}, \bm{x})) \\
        & \text{subject to} & & \|\bm{\delta}\|_{\infty} < \epsilon
    \end{aligned}
\end{equation}
```

$`\mathcal{L}(\cdot, \cdot)`$ is the distance between two vectors or the spectrograms for two signals and $`\epsilon`$ is a constraint making the perturbation subtle. The signal $`\bm{t}`$ can be arbitrary offering the content of the output utterance, on which we do not focus here.

Given a certain utterance $`\bm{y}`$ produced by a target speaker, we can formulate a targeted attack for output signal with specific speaker characteristics:

```math
\begin{equation}
    \label{eq:targeted_attack}
    \begin{aligned}
        & \underset{\bm{\delta}}{\text{minimize}} &  &
        \begin{multlined}
            \mathcal{L}(F(\bm{t}, \bm{x} + \bm{\delta}), F(\bm{t}, \bm{y})) \\
            - \lambda\mathcal{L}(F(\bm{t}, \bm{x} + \bm{\delta}), F(\bm{t}, \bm{x}))
        \end{multlined} \\
        & \text{subject to} &  & \|\bm{\delta}\|_{\infty} < \epsilon
    \end{aligned}
\end{equation}
```

The first term in the first expression in (<a href="#eq:targeted_attack" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:targeted_attack">[eq:targeted_attack]</a>) aims to make the model output sound like being produced by the speaker of $`\bm{y}`$, while the second term is to eliminate the original speaker identity in $`\bm{x}`$. $`\lambda`$ is a positive valued hyperparameter balancing the importance between source and target.

To effectively constrain the range of perturbation within $`[-\epsilon, \epsilon]`$ while solving (<a href="#eq:targeted_attack" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:targeted_attack">[eq:targeted*attack]</a>), we adopt the approach of \_Change of variable* as was done previously using $`\tanh(\cdot)`$ function. In this way (<a href="#eq:targeted_attack" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:targeted_attack">[eq:targeted_attack]</a>) above becomes (<a href="#eq:targeted_attack_with_tanh" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:targeted_attack_with_tanh">[eq:targeted_attack_with_tanh]</a>) below:

```math
\begin{equation}
    \label{eq:targeted_attack_with_tanh}
    \begin{aligned}
        & \underset{\bm{w}}{\text{minimize}} &  &
        \begin{multlined}
            \mathcal{L}(F(\bm{t}, \bm{x} + \bm{\delta}), F(\bm{t}, \bm{y})) \\
            - \lambda\mathcal{L}(F(\bm{t}, \bm{x} + \bm{\delta}), F(\bm{t}, \bm{x}))
        \end{multlined} \\
        & \text{subject to} &  & \bm{\delta} = \epsilon \cdot \tanh ( \bm{w} )
    \end{aligned}
\end{equation}
```

where $`\bm{w} \in \mathbb{R}^{M \times T}`$. The clipping function is not needed here.

## Embedding attack

The speaker encoder $`E_s`$ in Fig. <a href="#fig:diagram_of_methodologies" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:diagram_of_methodologies">1</a> embeds an utterance into a latent vector. These latent vectors for utterances produced by the same speaker tend to cluster closely together, while those by different speakers tend to be separated apart. The second approach proposed here is focused on the speaker encoder by directly changing the speaker embeddings of the utterances, referred to as embedding attack also in Fig. <a href="#fig:diagram_of_methodologies" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:diagram_of_methodologies">1</a>. As the decoder $`D`$ produces the output $`F(\bm{t}, \bm{x})`$ with speaker characteristics based on the speaker embedding $`E_s(\bm{x})`$ as in Fig. <a href="#fig:diagram_of_methodologies" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:diagram_of_methodologies">1</a>, changing the speaker embeddings thus alters the output of the decoder.

Following the notations and expressions in (<a href="#eq:targeted_attack_with_tanh" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:targeted_attack_with_tanh">[eq:targeted_attack_with_tanh]</a>), we have:

```math
\begin{equation}
    \label{eq:emb_attack}
    \begin{aligned}
        & \underset{\bm{w}}{\text{minimize}} &  &
        \begin{multlined}
            \mathcal{L}(E_s(\bm{x} + \bm{\delta}), E_s(\bm{y})) \\
            - \lambda\mathcal{L}(E_s(\bm{x} + \bm{\delta}), E_s(\bm{x})))
        \end{multlined} \\
        & \text{subject to} &  & \bm{\delta} = \epsilon \cdot \tanh ( \bm{w} )
    \end{aligned}
\end{equation}
```

where the adversarial attack is now performed with the speaker encoder $`E_s`$ only. Since only the speaker encoder is involved, it is therefore more efficient.

## Feedback attack

The third approach proposed here tries to combine the above two approaches by feeding the output spectrogram $`F(\bm{t}, \bm{x} + \bm{\delta})`$ from the decoder $`D`$ back to the speaker encoder $`E_s`$ (the red feedback loop in Fig. <a href="#fig:diagram_of_methodologies" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:diagram_of_methodologies">1</a>), and consider the speaker embedding obtained in this way. More specifically, $`E_s(\bm{x} + \bm{\delta})`$ in (<a href="#eq:emb_attack" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:emb_attack">[eq:emb_attack]</a>) is replaced by $`E_s(F(\bm{t}, \bm{x} + \bm{\delta}))`$ in (<a href="#eq:feedback_attack" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:feedback_attack">[eq:feedback_attack]</a>). This is referred to as the feedback attack also in Fig. <a href="#fig:diagram_of_methodologies" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:diagram_of_methodologies">1</a>.

```math
\begin{equation}
    \label{eq:feedback_attack}
    \begin{aligned}
        & \underset{\bm{w}}{\text{minimize}} &  &
        \begin{multlined}
            \mathcal{L}(E_s(F(\bm{t}, \bm{x} + \bm{\delta})), E_s(\bm{y})) \\
            - \lambda\mathcal{L}(E_s(F(\bm{t}, \bm{x} + \bm{\delta})), E_s(\bm{x})))
        \end{multlined} \\
        & \text{subject to} &  & \bm{\delta} = \epsilon \cdot \tanh ( \bm{w} )
    \end{aligned}
\end{equation}
```

# Experimental settings

We conducted experiments on the model proposed by Chou *et al.*  (referred to as Chou’s model below) and <span class="smallcaps">AutoVC</span>. Both were able to perform zero-shot voice conversion on unseen speakers given their few utterances without fine-tuning, considered suitable for our scenarios. Models such as StarGAN-VC, on the other hand, are limited to the voice produced by speakers seen during training, which makes it less likely to counterfeit other speakers’ voices, and we thus do not consider them here.

## Speaker encoders

For Chou’s model, all modules were trained jointly from scratch on the CSTR VCTK Corpus . The speaker encoder took a 512-dim mel spectrogram and generated a 128-dim speaker embedding. <span class="smallcaps">AutoVC</span> utilized pre-trained d-vector as speaker encoder, with 80-dim mel spectrogram as input and 256-dim speaker embedding as output, pre-trained on VoxCeleb1 and LibriSpeech but generalizable to unseen speakers.

## Vocoders

In inference, Chou’s model leveraged Griffin-Lim algorithm to synthesize the audio. <span class="smallcaps">AutoVC</span> previously adopted WaveNet as the spectrogram inverter, but here we used WaveRNN-based vocoder pre-trained on the VCTK corpus to generate waveforms with similar quality due to time limitation.

As we introduced perturbation on spectrogram, vocoders converting the spectrogram into waveform were necessary. We respectively adopted Griffin-lim algorithm and WaveRNN-based vocoder for attacks on Chou’s model and <span class="smallcaps">AutoVC</span>.

## Attack scenarios

Two scenarios were tested here. In the first scenario, the attacker has full access to the model to be attacked. With the complete architecture plus all trained parameters of the model being available, we can apply adversarial attack directly. This scenario is referred to as **white-box** scenario, in which all experiments were conducted on Chou’s model and <span class="smallcaps">AutoVC</span> with their publicly available network parameters and evaluated on exactly the same models.

The second one is referred to as **black-box** scenario, in which the attacker cannot directly access the parameters of the model to be attacked, or the architecture might even be unknown. For attacking Chou’s model, we trained a new model with the same architecture but different initialization, whereas for <span class="smallcaps">AutoVC</span> we trained a new speaker encoder with the architecture similar to the one in the original <span class="smallcaps">AutoVC</span>. These newly-trained models are then used as proxy models to generate adversarial examples to be evaluated with the publicly available ones in the same way as in white-box scenario.

## Attack procedure

We selected $`\ell_2`$ norm as $`\mathcal{L}(\cdot, \cdot)`$, and $`\lambda = 0.1`$ for all experiments. $`\bm{w}`$ in (<a href="#eq:targeted_attack_with_tanh" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:targeted_attack_with_tanh">[eq:targeted_attack_with_tanh]</a>), (<a href="#eq:emb_attack" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:emb_attack">[eq:emb_attack]</a>), (<a href="#eq:feedback_attack" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:feedback_attack">[eq:feedback_attack]</a>) was initialized from a standard normal distribution. The perturbations to be added to the utterances was $`\epsilon\tanh (\bm{w})`$. Adam optimizer was adopted to update $`\bm{w}`$ iteratively according to the loss function defined in (<a href="#eq:targeted_attack_with_tanh" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:targeted_attack_with_tanh">[eq:targeted_attack_with_tanh]</a>), (<a href="#eq:emb_attack" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:emb_attack">[eq:emb_attack]</a>), (<a href="#eq:feedback_attack" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:feedback_attack">[eq:feedback_attack]</a>) with the learning rate being 0.001 and the number of iterations being 1500.

# Results

<figure id="fig:compare_methodologies_white_box" data-latex-placement="t">
<figure id="fig:one_shot_white_box">

<figcaption>Chou’s</figcaption>
</figure>
<figure id="fig:autovc_white_box">

<figcaption><span class="smallcaps">AutoVC</span></figcaption>
</figure>
<figcaption> Speaker verification accuracy for the defended speaker with <em>Chou’s</em> (<span class="math inline"><em>ϵ</em> = 0.075</span>) and <span class="smallcaps">AutoVC</span> (<span class="math inline"><em>ϵ</em> = 0.05</span>) by the three proposed approaches under the white-box scenario. </figcaption>
</figure>

## Objective tests

For automatic evaluation, we adopted speaker verification accuracy as a reliable metric. The speaker verification system used here first encoded two input utterances into embeddings and then computed the similarity between the two. The two utterances were considered to be uttered by the same speaker if the similarity exceeds a threshold. In the test, each time we compared a machine-generated utterance with a real utterance providing the speaker characteristics in the experiments ($`\bm{x}`$ in Fig. <a href="#fig:diagram_of_methodologies" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:diagram_of_methodologies">1</a>), and the **speaker verification accuracy** used below is defined as the percentage of the cases that the two are considered to be produced by the same speaker by the speaker verification system.

The verification system used here was based on a pre-trained d-vector model [^1] which was different from the speaker encoders of the two attacked models. The threshold was determined based on the equal error rate (EER) when verifying utterance pairs randomly sampled from the VCTK corpus in the following way. We sampled 256 utterances for each speaker in the dataset, half of which were used as positive samples and the other half as negative ones. For positive samples, the similarity was computed with random utterances of the authentic speaker, whereas the negative ones were computed against random utterances produced by other randomly selected speakers. This gave the threshold of 0.683 with the EER being 0.056.

We randomly collected enough number of utterances offering the speaker characteristics ($`\bm{x}`$ in Fig. <a href="#fig:diagram_of_methodologies" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:diagram_of_methodologies">1</a>) from 109 speakers in the VCTK corpus and enough number of utterances offering the content ($`\bm{t}`$ in Fig. <a href="#fig:diagram_of_methodologies" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:diagram_of_methodologies">1</a>), and performed voice conversion with both Chou’s and <span class="smallcaps">AutoVC</span> to generate the **original outputs** ($`F(\bm{t}, \bm{x})`$ in Fig. <a href="#fig:diagram_of_methodologies" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:diagram_of_methodologies">1</a>). We randomly collected 100 of such pairs ($`\bm{x}, F(\bm{t}, \bm{x})`$) produced by both Chou’s and <span class="smallcaps">AutoVC</span> which were considered by the speaker verification system mentioned above to be produced by the same speaker to be used for the test below.[^2] Thus the speaker verification accuracy of all these **original outputs** ($`F(\bm{t}, \bm{x})`$) is 1.00. We then created corresponding adversarial examples ($`\bm{x} + \bm{\delta}`$ in (<a href="#eq:targeted_attack_with_tanh" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:targeted_attack_with_tanh">[eq:targeted_attack_with_tanh]</a>), (<a href="#eq:emb_attack" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:emb_attack">[eq:emb_attack]</a>), (<a href="#eq:feedback_attack" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:feedback_attack">[eq:feedback_attack]</a>)), targeting speakers with gender opposite to the defended speaker, and performed speaker verification respectively on these adversarial example utterances (referred to as **adversarial input**) and the converted utterances $`F(\bm{t}, \bm{x} + \bm{\delta})`$ (referred to as **adversarial output**). The same examples were used in the test for Chou’s and <span class="smallcaps">AutoVC</span>.

Fig. <a href="#fig:one_shot_white_box" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:one_shot_white_box">2</a> shows the speaker verification accuracy for the adversarial input and output utterances evaluated with respect to the defended speaker under the white-box scenario for Chou’s model. Results for the three approaches mentioned in Sec. <a href="#sec:method" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:method">3</a> are in the three sections (i) (ii) (iii), with the blue crosshatch-dotted bar and the red diagonal-lined bar respectively for **adversarial input** and **adversarial output**. Similarly in Fig. <a href="#fig:autovc_white_box" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:autovc_white_box">3</a> for <span class="smallcaps">AutoVC</span>. We can see the adversarial inputs sounded very close to the defended speaker or the perturbation $`\bm{\delta}`$ almost imperceptible (the blue bars very close to 1.00), while the converted utterances sounded as from a different speaker (the red bars much lower). All the three approaches were effective, although feedback attack worked the best for Chou’s (section (iii) in Fig. <a href="#fig:one_shot_white_box" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:one_shot_white_box">2</a>), while embedding attack worked very well for both Chou’s and <span class="smallcaps">AutoVC</span> with respect to both adversarial input and output (section (ii) of each chart).

<figure id="fig:compare_methodologies_black_box" data-latex-placement="t">

<figcaption> The speaker verification accuracy for different perturbation <span class="math inline"><em>ϵ</em></span> on <strong>Chou’s model</strong> under <strong>black-box</strong> scenario for the three proposed approaches: (a) end-to-end, (b) embedding, and (c) feedback attacks. </figcaption>
</figure>

For black-box scenario, we analyzed the same speaker verification accuracy as in Fig. <a href="#fig:one_shot_white_box" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:one_shot_white_box">2</a> for Chou’s model only but with varying scale of the perturbations $`\epsilon`$, with results plotted in Fig. <a href="#fig:compare_methodologies_black_box" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:compare_methodologies_black_box">5</a> (a) (b) (c) respectively for the three approaches proposed. We see when $`\epsilon = 0.075`$ the adversarial inputs were kept almost intact (blue curves close to 1.0) while adversarial outputs were seriously disturbed (red curves much lower). However, as $`\epsilon \geq 0.1`$ the speaker characteristics of the adversarial inputs were altered drastically (blue curves went down), although the adversarial outputs sounded very different (red curves went very low).

Fig. <a href="#fig:autovc_black_box" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:autovc_black_box">6</a> shows the same results as in Fig. <a href="#fig:compare_methodologies_black_box" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:compare_methodologies_black_box">5</a> except on <span class="smallcaps">AutoVC</span> with embedding attack only (as the other two methods did not work well in white-box scenario in Fig. <a href="#fig:autovc_white_box" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:autovc_white_box">3</a>). We see very similar results as in Fig. <a href="#fig:compare_methodologies_black_box" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:compare_methodologies_black_box">5</a>, and the embedding attack worked successfully with <span class="smallcaps">AutoVC</span> for good choices of $`\bm{\epsilon}`$ ($`0.05 \leq \bm{\epsilon} \leq 0.075`$).

Among the three proposed approaches, the embedding attack turned out to be the most attractive, considering both defending effectiveness (as mentioned above) and time efficiency. The feedback attack offered very good performance on Chou’s model, but less effective on <span class="smallcaps">AutoVC</span>. It also took more time to apply the perturbation as one more complete encoder-to-decoder inference was required. It is interesting to note that the end-to-end attack offered performance comparable to the other two approaches, although it is based on the distance between spectrograms, very different from the distance between speaker embeddings, based on which the other two approaches relied on.

<figure id="fig:autovc_black_box" data-latex-placement="htb">

<figcaption> Same as Fig. <a href="#fig:compare_methodologies_black_box" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:compare_methodologies_black_box">5</a> except on <strong><span class="smallcaps">AutoVC</span></strong> and for <strong>embedding attack</strong> only. </figcaption>
</figure>

## Subjective tests

<figure id="fig:mos_result" data-latex-placement="t">

<figcaption> Subjective evaluation results with <strong>embedding attack</strong> for Chou’s (<span class="math inline"><em>ϵ</em> = 0.075</span>) and <span class="smallcaps">AutoVC</span> (<span class="math inline"><em>ϵ</em> = 0.05</span>). On <span class="math inline"><em>x</em></span>-axis, “adv. input” stands for adversarial input and “adv. output” stands for adversarial output. </figcaption>
</figure>

The above speaker verification tests were objective but not necessarily adequate. So we performed subjective evaluation here but only with the most attractive **embedding attack** on both Chou’s and <span class="smallcaps">AutoVC</span> for both **white-** and **black-box** scenarios. We randomly selected 50 out of the 100 example utterances ($`\bm{x}`$) from the set used in objective evaluation described above. The corresponding adversarial inputs ($`\bm{x} + \bm{\delta}`$), outputs ($`F (\bm{t}, \bm{x} + \bm{\delta})`$) and the original outputs ($`F (\bm{t}, \bm{x})`$) as used above were then reused in subjective evaluation here for $`\epsilon = 0.075`$ and $`0.05`$ respectively for Chou’s and <span class="smallcaps">AutoVC</span>. The subjects were then asked to decide if two given utterances were from the same speaker by choosing one out of four: () Different, absolutely sure, () Different, but not very sure, () Same, but not very sure, and () Same, absolutely sure. Among the two utterances given, one is the original utterance $`\bm{x}`$, whereas the other is the **adversarial input**, **adversarial output**, or **original output**. Each utterance pair was evaluated by 6 subjects. To remove the possible outliers for subjective results, we deleted two extreme ballots on both ends out of the 6 ballots received for each utterance pair (delete a () if there is one, or delete a () if there is no ()’s, etc.; similar for () and ()). In this way 4 ballots were collected for each utterance pair, and 200 ballots for the 50 utterance pairs. The percentages of ballots choosing (), (), (), () out of these 200 are then shown in the bars for white-box, for black-box scenarios, and for original output in Fig. <a href="#fig:mos_result" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:mos_result">7</a> for Chou’s and <span class="smallcaps">AutoVC</span> respectively.

For Chou’s, we can see in Fig. <a href="#plot:one_shot_subjective_result" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="plot:one_shot_subjective_result">[plot:one_shot_subjective_result]</a> at least 70% - 78% of the ballots chose () or considered the adversarial inputs preserved the original speaker characteristics very well (red parts in bars ), yet at least 41% - 58% of the ballots chose () or considered adversarial outputs obviously from a different speaker (blue parts in bars ). Also for the original output at least 82% of the ballots considered them close to the original speaker (() plus () in bar ). As in Fig. <a href="#plot:autovc_subjective_result" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="plot:autovc_subjective_result">[plot:autovc_subjective_result]</a> for <span class="smallcaps">AutoVC</span>, at least 85% - 90% of the ballots chose () (red parts in bars ), yet more than 54% - 68% of the ballots chose () (blue parts in bars ). However, only about 27% of the ballots considered that the original outputs are from the same speaker (red and orange parts in bar ). This is probably because the objective speaker verification system used here didn’t match human’s perception very well based on which the selected original output with similarity to the original utterance above the threshold may not sound to human subjects as produced by the same speaker. Also for both two models, the black-box scenario was in general more challenging than the white-box one (lower green and blue parts, v.s. ), but the approach is still effective to a good extent. The demo samples can be found at <https://yistlin.github.io/attack-vc-demo>, and the source code is at <https://github.com/cyhuang-tw/attack-vc>.

# Conclusions

Improved voice conversion techniques imply higher demand for new technologies to defend personal speaker characteristics. This paper presents the first known attempt to perform adversarial attack on voice conversion. Three different approaches are proposed and tested on two state-of-the-art voice conversion models in both objective and subjective evaluation with very encouraging results, including for the black-box scenario closer to real applications.

# Acknowledgments

We are grateful to the authors of <span class="smallcaps">AutoVC</span> for offering the complete source code for our experiments and Chou’s kind help in model training. We also thank National Center for High-performance Computing (NCHC) for providing computational and storage resources.

[^1]: <https://github.com/resemble-ai/Resemblyzer>

[^2]: We only evaluated the examples that can be successfully converted by the voice conversion model because if an example cannot be successfully converted, then there is no need to defend it.

## References

1. Ju~chieh Chou, Cheng chieh Yeh, Hung yi~Lee, and Lin shan Lee,
   \newblock ``Multi-target voice conversion without parallel data by
   adversarially learning disentangled audio representations,''
   \newblock in {\em Proc. Interspeech 2018}, 2018, pp. 501--505.
2. T.~{Kaneko}, H.~{Kameoka}, K.~{Tanaka}, and N.~{Hojo},
   \newblock ``Cyclegan-vc2: Improved cyclegan-based non-parallel voice
   conversion,''
   \newblock in {\em ICASSP 2019 - 2019 IEEE International Conference on
   Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, 2019, pp. 6820--6824.
3. Hirokazu Kameoka, Takuhiro Kaneko, Kou Tanaka, and Nobukatsu Hojo,
   \newblock ``Stargan-vc: Non-parallel many-to-many voice conversion using star
   generative adversarial networks,''
   \newblock in {\em 2018 IEEE Spoken Language Technology Workshop (SLT)}. IEEE,
   2018, pp. 266--273.
4. Ju~chieh Chou and Hung-Yi Lee,
   \newblock ``{One-Shot Voice Conversion by Separating Speaker and Content
   Representations with Instance Normalization},''
   \newblock in {\em Proc. Interspeech 2019}, 2019, pp. 664--668.
5. Kaizhi Qian, Yang Zhang, Shiyu Chang, Xuesong Yang, and Mark Hasegawa-Johnson,
   \newblock ``{A}uto{VC}: Zero-shot voice style transfer with only autoencoder
   loss,''
   \newblock in {\em Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine
   Learning}, Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Eds., Long Beach,
   California, USA, 09--15 Jun 2019, vol.~97 of {\em Proceedings of Machine
   Learning Research}, pp. 5210--5219, PMLR.
6. Md~Sahidullah, Tomi Kinnunen, and Cemal Hanil{\c{c}}i,
   \newblock ``A comparison of features for synthetic speech detection,''
   \newblock in {\em INTERSPEECH 2015}, 2015, pp. 2087--2091.
7. Brian Dolhansky, Joanna Bitton, Ben Pflaum, Jikuo Lu, Russ Howes, Menglin Wang,
   and Cristian~Canton Ferrer,
   \newblock ``The deepfake detection challenge dataset,'' 2020.
8. Yuezun Li and Siwei Lyu,
   \newblock ``Exposing deepfake videos by detecting face warping artifacts,''
   \newblock in {\em The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
   Recognition (CVPR) Workshops}, June 2019.
9. U.~A. {Ciftci}, I.~{Demir}, and L.~{Yin},
   \newblock ``Fakecatcher: Detection of synthetic portrait videos using
   biological signals,''
   \newblock {\em IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence},
   pp. 1--1, 2020.
10. Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan,
    Ian Goodfellow, and Rob Fergus,
    \newblock ``Intriguing properties of neural networks,''
    \newblock in {\em International Conference on Learning Representations}, 2014.
11. Ian Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy,
    \newblock ``Explaining and harnessing adversarial examples,''
    \newblock in {\em International Conference on Learning Representations}, 2015.
12. Alexey Kurakin, Ian~J. Goodfellow, and Samy Bengio,
    \newblock ``Adversarial machine learning at scale,''
    \newblock in {\em International Conference on Learning Representations}, 2017.
13. Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and
    Adrian Vladu,
    \newblock ``Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks,''
    \newblock in {\em International Conference on Learning Representations}, 2018.
14. Jernej Kos, Ian Fischer, and Dawn Song,
    \newblock ``Adversarial examples for generative models,''
    \newblock in {\em 2018 IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops (SPW)}. IEEE, 2018,
    pp. 36--42.
15. Nicholas Carlini and David Wagner,
    \newblock ``Audio adversarial examples: Targeted attacks on speech-to-text,''
    \newblock in {\em 2018 IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops (SPW)}. IEEE, 2018,
    pp. 1--7.
16. Lea Sch\"{o}nherr, Katharina Kohls, Steffen Zeiler, Thorsten Holz, and Dorothea
    Kolossa,
    \newblock ``Adversarial attacks against automatic speech recognition systems
    via psychoacoustic hiding,''
    \newblock in {\em Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS)},
17.
18. Moustafa Alzantot, Bharathan Balaji, and Mani~B. Srivastava,
    \newblock ``Did you hear that? adversarial examples against automatic speech
    recognition,''
    \newblock in {\em Machine Deception Workshop, Neural Information Processing
    Systems (NIPS) 2017}, 2017.
19. R.~{Taori}, A.~{Kamsetty}, B.~{Chu}, and N.~{Vemuri},
    \newblock ``Targeted adversarial examples for black box audio systems,''
    \newblock in {\em 2019 IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops (SPW)}, 2019, pp.
    15--20.
20. Moustapha~M Cisse, Yossi Adi, Natalia Neverova, and Joseph Keshet,
    \newblock ``Houdini: Fooling deep structured visual and speech recognition
    models with adversarial examples,''
    \newblock in {\em Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30},
    I.~Guyon, U.~V. Luxburg, S.~Bengio, H.~Wallach, R.~Fergus, S.~Vishwanathan,
    and R.~Garnett, Eds., pp. 6977--6987. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
21. S.~{Liu}, H.~{Wu}, H.~{Lee}, and H.~{Meng},
    \newblock ``Adversarial attacks on spoofing countermeasures of automatic
    speaker verification,''
    \newblock in {\em 2019 IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding
    Workshop (ASRU)}, 2019, pp. 312--319.
22. X.~{Li}, J.~{Zhong}, X.~{Wu}, J.~{Yu}, X.~{Liu}, and H.~{Meng},
    \newblock ``Adversarial attacks on gmm i-vector based speaker verification
    systems,''
    \newblock in {\em ICASSP 2020 - 2020 IEEE International Conference on
    Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, 2020, pp. 6579--6583.
23. F.~{Kreuk}, Y.~{Adi}, M.~{Cisse}, and J.~{Keshet},
    \newblock ``Fooling end-to-end speaker verification with adversarial
    examples,''
    \newblock in {\em 2018 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
    Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, 2018, pp. 1962--1966.
24. {Yee Wah Lau}, M.~{Wagner}, and D.~{Tran},
    \newblock ``Vulnerability of speaker verification to voice mimicking,''
    \newblock in {\em Proceedings of 2004 International Symposium on Intelligent
    Multimedia, Video and Speech Processing, 2004.}, 2004, pp. 145--148.
25. Z.~{Wu}, T.~{Kinnunen}, E.~S. {Chng}, H.~{Li}, and E.~{Ambikairajah},
    \newblock ``A study on spoofing attack in state-of-the-art speaker
    verification: the telephone speech case,''
    \newblock in {\em Proceedings of The 2012 Asia Pacific Signal and Information
    Processing Association Annual Summit and Conference}, 2012, pp. 1--5.
26. Nicholas Evans, Tomi Kinnunen, and Junichi Yamagishi,
    \newblock ``Spoofing and countermeasures for automatic speaker verification,''
    \newblock in {\em INTERSPEECH-2013}, 2013, pp. 925--929.
27. Yanmin Qian, Nanxin Chen, and Kai Yu,
    \newblock ``Deep features for automatic spoofing detection,''
    \newblock {\em Speech Communication}, vol. 85, pp. 43 -- 52, 2016.
28. Galina Lavrentyeva, Sergey Novoselov, Egor Malykh, Alexander Kozlov, Oleg
    Kudashev, and Vadim Shchemelinin,
    \newblock ``Audio replay attack detection with deep learning frameworks,''
    \newblock in {\em Proc. Interspeech 2017}, 2017, pp. 82--86.
29. Giacomo Valenti, Héctor Delgado, Massimiliano Todisco, Nicholas Evans, and
    Laurent Pilati,
    \newblock ``An end-to-end spoofing countermeasure for automatic speaker
    verification using evolving recurrent neural networks,''
    \newblock in {\em Proc. Odyssey 2018 The Speaker and Language Recognition
    Workshop}, 2018, pp. 288--295.
30. S.~{Chen}, K.~{Ren}, S.~{Piao}, C.~{Wang}, Q.~{Wang}, J.~{Weng}, L.~{Su}, and
    A.~{Mohaisen},
    \newblock ``You can hear but you cannot steal: Defending against voice
    impersonation attacks on smartphones,''
    \newblock in {\em 2017 IEEE 37th International Conference on Distributed
    Computing Systems (ICDCS)}, 2017, pp. 183--195.
31. Massimiliano Todisco, Xin Wang, Ville Vestman, Md. Sahidullah, Héctor Delgado,
    Andreas Nautsch, Junichi Yamagishi, Nicholas Evans, Tomi~H. Kinnunen, and
    Kong~Aik Lee,
    \newblock ``{ASVspoof 2019: Future Horizons in Spoofed and Fake Audio
    Detection},''
    \newblock in {\em Proc. Interspeech 2019}, 2019, pp. 1008--1012.
32. N.~Carlini and D.~Wagner,
    \newblock ``Towards evaluating the robustness of neural networks,''
    \newblock in {\em 2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP)}, Los
    Alamitos, CA, USA, may 2017, pp. 39--57, IEEE Computer Society.
33. Christophe Veaux, Junichi Yamagishi, Kirsten MacDonald, et~al.,
    \newblock ``Cstr vctk corpus: English multi-speaker corpus for cstr voice
    cloning toolkit,'' 2017.
34. Li~Wan, Quan Wang, Alan Papir, and Ignacio~Lopez Moreno,
    \newblock ``Generalized end-to-end loss for speaker verification,''
    \newblock in {\em 2018 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
    Signal Processing (ICASSP)}. IEEE, 2018, pp. 4879--4883.
35. Arsha Nagrani, Joon~Son Chung, and Andrew Zisserman,
    \newblock ``Voxceleb: A large-scale speaker identification dataset,''
    \newblock in {\em Proc. Interspeech 2017}, 2017, pp. 2616--2620.
36. Vassil Panayotov, Guoguo Chen, Daniel Povey, and Sanjeev Khudanpur,
    \newblock ``Librispeech: an asr corpus based on public domain audio books,''
    \newblock in {\em 2015 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
    Signal Processing (ICASSP)}. IEEE, 2015, pp. 5206--5210.
37. D.~{Griffin} and {Jae Lim},
    \newblock ``Signal estimation from modified short-time fourier transform,''
    \newblock {\em IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing},
    vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 236--243, 1984.
38. Aäron van~den Oord, Sander Dieleman, Heiga Zen, Karen Simonyan, Oriol Vinyals,
    Alex Graves, Nal Kalchbrenner, Andrew Senior, and Koray Kavukcuoglu,
    \newblock ``Wavenet: A generative model for raw audio,''
    \newblock in {\em 9th ISCA Speech Synthesis Workshop}, 2016, pp. 125--125.
39. Jaime Lorenzo-Trueba, Thomas Drugman, Javier Latorre, Thomas Merritt, Bartosz
    Putrycz, Roberto Barra-Chicote, Alexis Moinet, and Vatsal Aggarwal,
    \newblock ``{Towards Achieving Robust Universal Neural Vocoding},''
    \newblock in {\em Proc. Interspeech 2019}, 2019, pp. 181--185.
40. Diederik~P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba,
    \newblock ``Adam: {A} method for stochastic optimization,''
    \newblock in {\em 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations,
    {ICLR} 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track
    Proceedings}, Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun, Eds., 2015.
