---
arxiv_id: '2009.09761'
title: 'DiffWave: A Versatile Diffusion Model for Audio Synthesis'
authors:
- Zhifeng Kong
- Wei Ping
- Jiaji Huang
- Kexin Zhao
- Bryan Catanzaro
submitted: '2020-09-21'
categories:
- eess.AS
- cs.CL
- cs.LG
- cs.SD
- stat.ML
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.09761
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 15/55
citations_resolved_at: '2026-07-07T16:45:12+00:00'
references_parsed: 55
arxiv_version: ''
---

# Introduction

Deep generative models have produced high-fidelity raw audio in speech synthesis and music generation. In previous work, likelihood-based models, including autoregressive models  and flow-based models , have predominated in audio synthesis because of the simple training objective and superior ability of modeling the fine details of waveform in real data. There are other waveform models, which often require auxiliary losses for training, such as flow-based models trained by distillation , variational auto-encoder (VAE) based model , and generative adversarial network (GAN) based models .

Most of previous waveform models focus on audio synthesis with informative local conditioner (e.g., mel spectrogram or aligned linguistic features), with only a few exceptions for unconditional generation . It has been noticed that autoregressive models (e.g., WaveNet) tend to generate made-up word-like sounds , or inferior samples  under unconditional settings. This is because very long sequences need to be generated (e.g., 16,000 time-steps for one second speech) without any conditional information.

*Diffusion probabilistic models* (diffusion models for brevity) are a class of promising generative models, which use a Markov chain to gradually convert a simple distribution (e.g., isotropic Gaussian) into complicated data distribution . Although the data likelihood is intractable, diffusion models can be efficiently trained by optimizing the variational lower bound (ELBO). Most recently, a certain parameterization has been shown successful in image synthesis , which is connected with denoising score matching . Diffusion models can use a diffusion (noise-adding) process without learnable parameters to obtain the “whitened” latents from training data. Therefore, no additional neural networks are required for training in contrast to other models (e.g., the encoder in VAE  or the discriminator in GAN ). This avoids the challenging “posterior collapse” or “mode collapse” issues stemming from the joint training of two networks, and hence is valuable for high-fidelity audio synthesis.

In this work, we propose DiffWave, a versatile diffusion probabilistic model for raw audio synthesis. DiffWave has several advantages over previous work: *i*) It is *non-autoregressive* thus can synthesize high-dimensional waveform in parallel. *ii*) It is *flexible* as it does not impose any architectural constraints in contrast to flow-based models, which need to keep the bijection between latents and data (e.g., see more analysis in ). This leads to small-footprint neural vocoders that still generate high-fidelity speech. *iii*) It uses a *single* ELBO-based training objective without any auxiliary losses (e.g., spectrogram-based losses) for high-fidelity synthesis. *iv*) It is a *versatile* model that produces high-quality audio signals for both conditional and unconditional waveform generation.

Specifically, we make the following contributions:

1.  DiffWave uses a feed-forward and *bidirectional* dilated convolution architecture motivated by WaveNet . It matches the strong WaveNet vocoder in terms of speech quality (MOS: $`4.44`$ vs. $`4.43`$), while synthesizing orders of magnitude faster as it only requires a few sequential steps (e.g., 6) for generating very long waveforms.

2.  Our small DiffWave has 2.64M parameters and synthesizes 22.05 kHz high-fidelity speech (MOS: $`4.37`$) more than $`5\times`$ faster than real-time on a V100 GPU without engineered kernels. Although it is still slower than the state-of-the-art flow-based models , it has much smaller footprint. We expect further speed-up by optimizing its inference mechanism in the future.

3.  DiffWave significantly outperforms WaveGAN  and WaveNet in the challenging unconditional and class-conditional waveform generation tasks in terms of audio quality and sample diversity measured by several automatic and human evaluations.

We organize the rest of the paper as follows. We present the diffusion models in Section <a href="#sec:method" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:method">2</a>, and introduce DiffWave architecture in Section <a href="#sec:architecture" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:architecture">3</a>. Section <a href="#sec:related_work" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:related_work">4</a> discusses related work. We report experimental results in Section <a href="#sec:experiments" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:experiments">5</a> and conclude the paper in Section <a href="#sec:conclusion" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:conclusion">6</a>.

# Diffusion Probabilistic Models

<figure id="fig: diffusion model" data-latex-placement="!t">
<p>(-490,25)</p>
<p>(-435,-90)</p>
<p>(-380,25)</p>
<p>(-260,-90)</p>
<p>(-200,25)</p>
<figcaption>The diffusion and reverse process in diffusion probabilistic models. The reverse process gradually converts the white noise signal into speech waveform through a Markov chain <span class="math inline"><em>p</em><sub><em>θ</em></sub>(<em>x</em><sub><em>t</em> − 1</sub>|<em>x</em><sub><em>t</em></sub>)</span>.</figcaption>
</figure>

We define $`\qdata(x_0)`$ as the data distribution on $`\mathbb{R}^L`$, where $`L`$ is the data dimension. Let $`x_t\in\mathbb{R}^L`$ for $`t=0,1,\cdots,T`$ be a sequence of variables with the same dimension, where $`t`$ is the index for diffusion steps. Then, a diffusion model of $`T`$ steps is composed of two processes: the diffusion process, and the reverse process . Both of them are illustrated in Figure <a href="#fig: diffusion model" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig: diffusion model">1</a>.

<div class="minipage">

<div class="algorithm">

<div class="algorithmic">

Sample $`x_0\sim\qdata`$, $`\epsilon\sim\gN(0,I)`$, and\
$`t\sim\mathrm{Uniform}(\{1,\cdots,T\})`$ Take gradient step on\
$`\nabla_{\theta}\|\epsilon-\epsilon_{\theta}(\sqrt{\bar{\alpha}_t}x_0+\sqrt{1-\bar{\alpha}_t}\epsilon,~t)\|_2^2`$\
according to <a href="#eq: train_obj" data-reference-type="eqref" data-reference="eq: train_obj">[eq: train_obj]</a>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="minipage">

<div class="algorithm">

<div class="algorithmic">

Sample $`x_T\sim p_{\mathrm{latent}}=\gN(0,I)`$ Compute $`\mu_{\theta}(x_t,t)`$ and $`\sigma_{\theta}(x_t,t)`$ using <a href="#eq: parameterization" data-reference-type="eqref" data-reference="eq: parameterization">[eq: parameterization]</a> Sample $`x_{t-1}\sim p_{\theta}(x_{t-1}|x_t)=`$\
$`\gN(x_{t-1};\mu_{\theta}(x_t,t), \sigma_{\theta}(x_t,t)^2I)`$

</div>

</div>

</div>

The **diffusion process** is defined by a fixed Markov chain from data $`x_0`$ to the latent variable $`x_T`$:
``` math
\begin{align}
q(x_1,\cdots,x_T|x_0) = \prod_{t=1}^T q(x_t|x_{t-1}),
\quad\ \
\end{align}
```
where each of $`q(x_t|x_{t-1})`$ is fixed to $`\gN(x_t;\sqrt{1-\beta_t}x_{t-1},\beta_t I)`$ for a small positive constant $`\beta_t`$. The function of $`q(x_t|x_{t-1})`$ is to add small Gaussian noise to the distribution of $`x_{t-1}`$. The whole process gradually converts data $`x_0`$ to whitened latents $`x_T`$ according to a variance schedule $`\beta_1,\cdots,\beta_T`$. [^3]

The **reverse process** is defined by a Markov chain from $`x_T`$ to $`x_0`$ parameterized by $`\theta`$:
``` math
\begin{align}
p_{\mathrm{latent}}(x_T)=\gN(0,I), ~~\text{and}~~ p_{\theta}(x_0,\cdots,x_{T-1}|x_T)=\prod_{t=1}^T p_{\theta}(x_{t-1}|x_t),
\end{align}
```
where $`p_{\mathrm{latent}}(x_T)`$ is isotropic Gaussian, and the transition probability $`p_{\theta}(x_{t-1}|x_t)`$ is parameterized as $`\gN(x_{t-1};\mu_{\theta}(x_t,t), \sigma_{\theta}(x_t,t)^2I)`$ with shared parameter $`\theta`$. Note that both $`\mu_{\theta}`$ and $`\sigma_{\theta}`$ take two inputs: the diffusion-step $`t\in\mathbb{N}`$, and variable $`x_t\in\mathbb{R}^L`$. $`\mu_{\theta}`$ outputs an $`L`$-dimensional vector as the mean, and $`\sigma_{\theta}`$ outputs a real number as the standard deviation. The goal of $`p_{\theta}(x_{t-1}|x_t)`$ is to eliminate the Gaussian noise (i.e. denoise) added in the diffusion process.

**Sampling**: Given the reverse process, the generative procedure is to first sample an $`x_T \sim \gN(0,I)`$, and then sample $`x_{t-1}\sim p_{\theta}(x_{t-1}|x_t)`$ for $`t=T,T-1,\cdots,1`$. The output $`x_0`$ is the sampled data.

**Training**: The likelihood $`p_{\theta} (x_0) = \int p_{\theta}(x_0,\cdots,x_{T-1}|x_T) \cdot p_{\mathrm{latent}}(x_T)~\mathbf{d}x_{1:T}`$ is intractable to calculate in general. The model is thus trained by maximizing its variational lower bound (ELBO):
``` math
\begin{align}
 \mathbb{E}_{\qdata(x_0)} \log p_{\theta}(x_0) 
  &=  \mathbb{E}_{\qdata(x_0)} \log\mathbb{E}_{q(x_1,\cdots, x_T|x_0)}
    \Big[ \frac{p_{\theta}(x_0,\cdots,x_{T-1}|x_T)\times p_{\mathrm{latent}}(x_T)}{q(x_1,\cdots,x_T|x_0)}
    \Big] \nonumber \\
  &\geq
  \mathbb{E}_{q(x_0,\cdots,x_T)} \log \frac{p_{\theta}(x_0,\cdots,x_{T-1}|x_T)\times p_{\mathrm{latent}}(x_T)}{q(x_1,\cdots,x_T|x_0)} := \mathrm{ELBO} .
  \label{eq: elbo}
\end{align}
```
Most recently, showed that under a certain parameterization, the ELBO of the diffusion model can be calculated in closed-form. This accelerates the computation and avoids Monte Carlo estimates, which have high variance. This parameterization is motivated by its connection to denoising score matching with Langevin dynamics . To introduce this parameterization, we first define some constants based on the variance schedule $`\{\beta_t\}_{t=1}^T`$ in the diffusion process as in  :
``` math
\begin{equation}
\label{eq: const}
\alpha_t = 1 - \beta_t, ~~ \bar{\alpha}_t = \prod_{s=1}^t\alpha_s, ~~ \tilde{\beta}_t=\frac{1-\bar{\alpha}_{t-1}}{1-\bar{\alpha}_t}\beta_t ~~\text{ for}~~ t>1 ~~\text{and}~~ \tilde{\beta}_1=\beta_1.
\end{equation}
```
Then, the parameterizations of $`\mu_{\theta}`$ and $`\sigma_{\theta}`$ are defined by
``` math
\begin{equation}
\label{eq: parameterization}
\mu_{\theta}(x_t, t) = \frac{1}{\sqrt{\alpha_t}}\left(x_t-\frac{\beta_t}{\sqrt{1-\bar{\alpha}_t}}\epsilon_{\theta}(x_t, t)\right), \text{ ~and~ } \sigma_{\theta}(x_t, t) = \tilde{\beta}_t^{\frac12},
\end{equation}
```
where $`\epsilon_{\theta}:\mathbb{R}^L\times\mathbb{N}\rightarrow\mathbb{R}^L`$ is a neural network also taking $`x_t`$ and the diffusion-step $`t`$ as inputs. Note that $`\sigma_{\theta}(x_t,t)`$ is fixed to a constant $`\tilde{\beta}_t^{\frac12}`$ for every step $`t`$ under this parameterization. In the following proposition, we explicitly provide the closed-form expression of the ELBO.

<div id="prop:elbo" class="proposition">

**Proposition 1**. *Suppose a series of fixed schedule $`\{\beta_t\}_{t=1}^T`$ are given. Let $`\epsilon\sim\gN(0,I)`$ and $`x_0\sim\qdata`$. Then, under the parameterization in <a href="#eq: parameterization" data-reference-type="eqref" data-reference="eq: parameterization">[eq: parameterization]</a>, we have
``` math
\begin{equation}
-\mathrm{ELBO} = c + \sum_{t=1}^T\kappa_t\mathbb{E}_{x_0,\epsilon}\ \|\epsilon-\epsilon_{\theta}(\sqrt{\bar{\alpha}_t}x_0+\sqrt{1-\bar{\alpha}_t}\epsilon,~t)\|_2^2
\end{equation}
```
for some constants $`c`$ and $`\kappa_t`$, where $`\kappa_t=\frac{\beta_t}{2\alpha_t(1-\bar{\alpha}_{t-1})}`$  for  $`t>1`$, and $`\kappa_1=\frac{1}{2\alpha_1}`$.*

</div>

Note that $`c`$ is irrelevant for optimization purpose. The key idea in the proof is to expand the ELBO into a sum of KL divergences between tractable Gaussian distributions, which have a closed-form expression. We refer the readers to look at Section <a href="#appendix: proof" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="appendix: proof">7</a> in the Appendix for the full proof.

In addition, reported that minimizing the following unweighted variant of the ELBO leads to higher generation quality:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\label{eq: train_obj}
\min_{\theta} L_\mathrm{{unweighted}}(\theta) = 
\mathbb{E}_{x_0,\epsilon,t}\ 
\|\epsilon-\epsilon_{\theta}(\sqrt{\bar{\alpha}_t}x_0+\sqrt{1-\bar{\alpha}_t}\epsilon,~t)\|_2^2
\end{equation}
```
where $`t`$ is uniformly taken from $`1,\cdots,T`$. Therefore, we also use this training objective in this paper. We summarize the training and sampling procedures in Algorithm <a href="#alg: training" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="alg: training">[alg: training]</a> and <a href="#alg: sampling" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="alg: sampling">[alg: sampling]</a>, respectively.

**Fast sampling**: Given a trained model from Algorithm <a href="#alg: training" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="alg: training">[alg: training]</a>, we noticed that the most effective denoising steps at sampling occur near $`t = 0`$ (see Section IV on demo website). This encourages us to design a fast sampling algorithm with much fewer denoising steps $`T_{\text{infer}}`$ (e.g., 6) than $`T`$ at training (e.g., 200). The key idea is to “collapse” the $`T`$-step reverse process into a $`T_{\text{infer}}`$-step process with carefully designed variance schedule. We provide the details in Appendix <a href="#appendix: fast" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="appendix: fast">8</a>.

# DiffWave Architecture

<figure id="fig: architecture concise" data-latex-placement="t!">
<embed src="plots/Architecture_concise.pdf" style="width:78.0%" />
<figcaption>The network architecture of DiffWave in modeling <span class="math inline"><em>ϵ</em><sub><em>θ</em></sub> : ℝ<sup><em>L</em></sup> × ℕ → ℝ<sup><em>L</em></sup></span>.</figcaption>
</figure>

In this section, we present the architecture of DiffWave (see Figure <a href="#fig: architecture concise" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig: architecture concise">2</a> for an illustration). We build the network $`\epsilon_{\theta}:\mathbb{R}^L\times\mathbb{N}\rightarrow\mathbb{R}^L`$ in  <a href="#eq: parameterization" data-reference-type="eqref" data-reference="eq: parameterization">[eq: parameterization]</a> based on a *bidirectional* dilated convolution architecture that is different from WaveNet , because there is no autoregressive generation constraint. [^4] The similar architecture has been applied for source separation . The network is non-autoregressive, so generating an audio $`x_0`$ with length $`L`$ from latents $`x_T`$ requires $`T`$ rounds of forward propagation, where $`T`$ (e.g., 50) is much smaller than the waveform length $`L`$. The network is composed of a stack of $`N`$ residual layers with residual channels $`C`$. These layers are grouped into $`m`$ blocks and each block has $`n = \frac{N}{m}`$ layers. We use a bidirectional dilated convolution (Bi-DilConv) with kernel size $`3`$ in each layer. The dilation is doubled at each layer within each block, i.e., $`[1, 2, 4, \cdots, 2^{n-1}]`$. We sum the skip connections from all residual layers as in WaveNet. More details including the tensor shapes are included in Section <a href="#appendix: architecture" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="appendix: architecture">9</a> in the Appendix.

## Diffusion-step Embedding

It is important to include the diffusion-step $`t`$ as part of the input, as the model needs to output different $`\epsilon_{\theta}(\cdot,t)`$ for different $`t`$. We use an 128-dimensional encoding vector for each $`t`$ :
``` math
\begin{equation}
\begin{array}{l}
\displaystyle t_{\mathrm{embedding}}=\left[\sin\left(10^{\frac{0\times4}{63}}t\right),\cdots,\sin\left(10^{\frac{63\times4}{63}}t\right),\right. \left.\cos\left(10^{\frac{0\times4}{63}}t\right),\cdots,\cos\left(10^{\frac{63\times4}{63}}t\right)\right]
\end{array}
\end{equation}
```
We then apply three fully connected (FC) layers on the encoding, where the first two FCs share parameters among all residual layers. The last residual-layer-specific FC maps the output of the second FC into a $`C`$-dimensional embedding vector. We next broadcast this embedding vector over length and add it to the input of every residual layer.

## Conditional generation

**Local conditioner:** In speech synthesis, a neural vocoder can synthesize the waveform conditioned on the aligned linguistic features , the mel spectrogram from a text-to-spectrogram model , or the hidden states within the text-to-wave architecture . In this work, we test DiffWave as a neural vocoder conditioned on mel spectrogram. We first upsample the mel spectrogram to the same length as waveform through transposed 2-D convolutions. After a layer-specific Conv1$`\times`$<!-- -->1 mapping its mel-band into $`2C`$ channels, the conditioner is added as a bias term for the dilated convolution in each residual layer. The hyperparameters can be found in Section <a href="#subsec: vocoder_experiment" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsec: vocoder_experiment">5.1</a>.

**Global conditioner:** In many generative tasks, the conditional information is given by global discrete labels (e.g., speaker IDs or word IDs). We use shared embeddings with dimension $`d_{\mathrm{label}}=128`$ in all experiments. In each residual layer, we apply a layer-specific Conv1$`\times`$<!-- -->1 to map $`d_{\mathrm{label}}`$ to $`2C`$ channels, and add the embedding as a bias term after the dilated convolution in each residual layer.

## Unconditional generation

In unconditional generation task, the model needs to generate consistent utterances without conditional information. It is important for the output units of the network to have a receptive field size (denoted as $`r`$) larger than the length $`L`$ of the utterance. Indeed, we need $`r\ge2L`$, thus the left and right-most output units have receptive fields covering the whole $`L`$-dimensional inputs as illustrated in Figure <a href="#fig: receptive fields" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig: receptive fields">4</a> in Appendix <a href="#appendix: architecture" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="appendix: architecture">9</a>. This posts a challenge for architecture design even with the dilated convolutions.

For a stack of dilated convolution layers, the receptive field size of the output is up to: $`r = (k-1)\sum_{i} d_i + 1`$, where $`k`$ is the kernel size and $`d_i`$ is the dilation at $`i`$-th residual layer. For example, 30-layer dilated convolution has a receptive field size $`r=6139`$, with $`k=3`$ and dilation cycle $`[1, 2, \cdots, 512]`$. This only amounts to 0.38s of 16kHz audio. We can further increase the number of layers and the size of dilation cycles; however, we found degraded quality with deeper layers and larger dilation cycles. This is particularly true for WaveNet. In fact, previous study  suggests that even a moderate large receptive field size (e.g., 6139) is not effectively used in WaveNet and it tends to focus on much shorter context (e.g., 500). DiffWave has an advantage in enlarging the receptive fields of output $`x_0`$: by iterating from $`x_T`$ to $`x_0`$ in the reverse process, the receptive field size can be increased up to $`T \times r`$, which makes DiffWave suitable for unconditional generation.

# Related Work

In the past years, many neural text-to-speech (TTS) systems have been introduced. An incomplete list includes WaveNet , Deep Voice 1 & 2 & 3 , Tacotron 1 & 2 , Char2Wav , VoiceLoop , Parallel WaveNet , WaveRNN , ClariNet , ParaNet , FastSpeech , GAN-TTS , and Flowtron . These systems first generate intermediate representations (e.g., aligned linguistic features, mel spectrogram, or hidden representations) conditioned on text, then use a neural vocoder to synthesize the raw waveform.

Neural vocoder plays the most important role in the recent success of speech synthesis. Autoregressive models like WaveNet and WaveRNN can generate high-fidelity speech, but in a sequential way of generation. Parallel WaveNet and ClariNet distill parallel flow-based models from WaveNet, thus can synthesize waveform in parallel. In contrast, WaveFlow , WaveGlow  and FloWaveNet  are trained by maximizing likelihood. There are other waveform models, such as VAE-based models , GAN-based models , and neural signal processing models . In contrast to likelihood-based models, they often require auxiliary training losses to improve the audio fidelity. The proposed DiffWave is another promising neural vocoder synthesizing the best quality of speech with a single objective function.

Unconditional generation of audio in the time domain is a challenging task in general. Likelihood-based models are forced to learn all possible variations within the dataset without any conditional information, which can be quite difficult with limited model capacity. In practice, these models produce made-up word-like sounds or inferior samples . VQ-VAE  circumvents this issue by compressing the waveform into compact latent code, and training an autoregressive model in latent domain. GAN-based models are believed to be suitable for unconditional generation  due to the “mode seeking” behaviour and success in image domain . Note that unconditional generation of audio in the frequency domain is considered easier, as the spectrogram is much shorter (e.g., 200$`\times`$) than waveform .

In this work, we demonstrate the superior performance of DiffWave in unconditional generation of waveform. In contrast to the exact-likelihood models, DiffWave maximizes a variational lower bound of the likelihood, which can focus on the major variations within the data and alleviate the requirements for model capacity. In contrast to GAN or VAE-based models , it is much easier to train without mode collapse, posterior collapse, or training instability stemming from the joint training of two networks. There is a concurrent work  that uses diffusion probabilistic models for waveform generation. In contrast to DiffWave, it uses a neural architecture similar to GAN-TTS and focuses on the neural vocoding task only. Our DiffWave vocoder has much fewer parameters than WaveGrad – 2.64M vs. 15M for Base models and 6.91M vs. 23M for Large models. The small memory footprint is preferred in production TTS systems, especially for on-device deployment. In addition, DiffWave requires a smaller batch size (16 vs. 256) and fewer computational resources for training.

# Experiments

We evaluate DiffWave on neural vocoding, unconditional and class-conditional generation tasks.

## Neural vocoding

**Data:** We use the LJ speech dataset  that contains $`\sim`$<!-- -->24 hours of audio recorded in home environment with a sampling rate of 22.05 kHz. It contains 13,100 utterances from a female speaker.

**Models:** We compare DiffWave with several state-of-the-art neural vocoders, including WaveNet, ClariNet, WaveGlow and WaveFlow. Details of baseline models can be found in the original papers. Their hyperparameters can be found in Table <a href="#tab: vocoder-mos" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab: vocoder-mos">[tab: vocoder-mos]</a>. Our DiffWave models have 30 residual layers, kernel size 3, and dilation cycle $`[1, 2, \cdots, 512]`$. We compare DiffWave models with different number of diffusion steps $`T \in \{20, 40, 50, 200\}`$ and residual channels $`C \in \{64, 128\}`$. We use linear spaced schedule for $`\beta_{t} \in [1\times10^{-4}, 0.02]`$ for DiffWave with $`T=200`$, and $`\beta_{t} \in [1\times10^{-4}, 0.05]`$ for DiffWave with $`T\leq50`$. The reason to increase $`\beta_t`$ for smaller $`T`$ is to make $`q(x_T|x_0)`$ close to $`p_{\mathrm{latent}}`$. In addition, we compare the fast sampling algorithm with smaller $`T_{\text{infer}}`$ (see Appendix <a href="#appendix: fast" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="appendix: fast">8</a>), denoted as DiffWave (Fast), with the regular sampling (Algorithm <a href="#alg: sampling" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="alg: sampling">[alg: sampling]</a>). Both of them use the same trained models.

**Conditioner:** We use the 80-band mel spectrogram of the original audio as the conditioner to test these neural vocoders as in previous work . We set FFT size to 1024, hop size to 256, and window size to 1024. We upsample the mel spectrogram 256 times by applying two layers of transposed 2-D convolution (in time and frequency) interleaved with leaky ReLU ($`\alpha=0.4`$). For each layer, the upsamling stride in time is 16 and 2-D filter sizes are $`[32, 3]`$. After upsampling, we use a layer-specific Conv1$`\times`$<!-- -->1 to map the 80 mel bands into $`2\times`$ residual channels, then add the conditioner as a bias term for the dilated convolution before the gated-tanh nonlinearities in each residual layer.

**Training:** We train DiffWave on 8 Nvidia 2080Ti GPUs using random short audio clips of 16,000 samples from each utterance. We use Adam optimizer  with a batch size of 16 and learning rate $`2\times10^{-4}`$. We train all DiffWave models for 1M steps. For other models, we follow the training setups as in the original papers.

<div class="tabular">

l \!width 1pt ccccr\|c **Model** & $`T`$ & $`T_{\text{infer}}`$ & **layers** & **res. channels** & **\#param**($`\downarrow`$) & **MOS**($`\uparrow`$)\
WaveNet & —& —& 30 & 128 & 4.57M & $`\textbf{4.43}\pm0.10`$\
ClariNet & —& —& 60 & 64 & 2.17M & $`4.27\pm 0.09`$\
WaveGlow & —& —& 96 & 256 & 87.88M & $`4.33\pm0.12`$\
WaveFlow & —& —& 64 & 64 & 5.91M & $`4.30\pm 0.11`$\
WaveFlow & —& —& 64 & 128 & 22.25M & $`4.40\pm 0.07`$\
$`\text{DiffWave}_{\text{ BASE}}`$ & 20 & 20 & 30 & 64 & 2.64M & $`4.31\pm 0.09`$\
$`\text{DiffWave}_{\text{ BASE}}`$ & 40 & 40 & 30 & 64 & 2.64M & $`{4.35}\pm 0.10`$\
$`\text{DiffWave}_{\text{ BASE}}`$ & 50 & 50 & 30 & 64 & 2.64M & $`\textbf{4.38}\pm 0.08`$\
$`\text{DiffWave}_{\text{ LARGE}}`$ & 200 & 200 & 30 & 128 & 6.91M & $`\textbf{4.44}\pm 0.07`$\
$`\text{DiffWave}_{\text{ BASE}}\text{ (Fast)}`$ & 50 & 6 & 30 & 64 & 2.64M & $`\textit{4.37}\pm 0.07`$\
$`\text{DiffWave}_{\text{ LARGE}}\text{ (Fast)}`$ & 200 & 6 & 30 & 128 & 6.91M & $`\textit{4.42}\pm 0.09`$\
Ground-truth & —& —& —& —& —& $`4.52\pm 0.06`$\

</div>

**Results:** We use the crowdMOS tookit  for speech quality evaluation, where the test utterances from all models were presented to Mechanical Turk workers. We report the 5-scale Mean Opinion Scores (MOS), and model footprints in Table <a href="#tab: vocoder-mos" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab: vocoder-mos">[tab: vocoder-mos]</a> [^5]. Our $`\text{DiffWave}_{\text{ LARGE}}`$ model with residual channels 128 matches the strong WaveNet vocoder in terms of speech quality (MOS: 4.44 vs. 4.43). The $`\text{DiffWave}_{\text{ BASE}}`$ with residual channels 64 also generates high quality speech (e.g., MOS: 4.35) even with small number of diffusion steps (e.g., $`T=40`$ or $`20`$). For synthesis speed, $`\text{DiffWave}_{\text{ BASE}}`$ ($`T=20`$) in FP32 generates audio $`2.1\times`$ faster than real-time, and $`\text{DiffWave}_{\text{ BASE}}`$ ($`T=40`$) in FP32 is $`1.1\times`$ faster than real-time on a Nvidia V100 GPU without engineering optimization. Meanwhile, $`\text{DiffWave}_{\text{ BASE}}`$ (Fast) and $`\text{DiffWave}_{\text{ LARGE}}`$ (Fast) can be $`5.6\times`$ and $`3.5\times`$ faster than real-time respectively and still obtain good audio fidelity. In contrast, a WaveNet implementation can be $`500\times`$ slower than real-time at synthesis without engineered kernels. DiffWave is still slower than the state-of-the-art flow-based models (e.g., a 5.91M WaveFlow is $`>40\times`$ faster than real-time in FP16), but has smaller footprint and slightly better quality. Because DiffWave does not impose any architectural constraints as in flow-based models, we expect further speed-up by optimizing the architecture and inference mechanism in the future.

## Unconditional generation

In this section, we apply DiffWave to an unconditional generation task based on raw waveform only.

**Data:** We use the Speech Commands dataset , which contains many spoken words by thousands of speakers under various recording conditions including some very noisy environment. We select the subset that contains spoken digits (0$`\sim`$<!-- -->9), which we call the SC09 dataset. The SC09 dataset contains 31,158 training utterances ($`\sim`$<!-- -->8.7 hours in total) by 2,032 speakers, where each audio has length equal to one second under sampling rate 16kHz. Therefore, the data dimension $`L`$ is 16,000. Note that the SC09 dataset exhibits various variations (e.g., contents, speakers, speech rate, recording conditions); the generative models need to model them without any conditional information.

**Models:** We compare DiffWave with WaveNet and WaveGAN. We also tried to remove the mel conditioner in a state-of-the-art GAN-based neural vocoder , but found it could not generate intelligible speech in this unconditional task. We use 30 layer-WaveNet models with residual channels 128 (denoted as WaveNet-128) and 256 (denoted as WaveNet-256), respectively. We tried to increase the size of the dilation cycle and the number of layers, but these modifications lead to worse quality. In particular, a large dilation cycle (e.g., up to 2048) leads to unstable training. For WaveGAN, we use their pretrained model on Google Colab. We use a 36-layer DiffWave model with kernel size 3 and dilation cycle $`[1, 2, \cdots, 2048]`$. We set the number of diffusion steps $`T = 200`$ and residual channels $`C = 256`$. We use linear spaced schedule for $`\beta_{t} \in [1\times10^{-4}, 0.02]`$.

**Training:** We train WaveNet and DiffWave on 8 Nvidia 2080Ti GPUs using full utterances. We use Adam optimizer with a batch size of 16. For WaveNet, we set the initial learning rate as $`1\times10^{-3}`$ and halve the learning rate every 200K iterations. For DiffWave, we fix the learning rate to $`2\times10^{-4}`$. We train WaveNet and DiffWave for 1M steps.

**Evaluation:** For human evaluation, we report the 5-scale MOS for speech quality similar to Section <a href="#subsec: vocoder_experiment" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsec: vocoder_experiment">5.1</a>. To automatically evaluate the quality of generated audio samples, we train a ResNeXT classifier on the SC09 dataset according to an open repository . The classifier achieves $`99.06\%`$ accuracy on the trainset and $`98.76\%`$ accuracy on the testset. We use the following evaluation metrics based on the 1024-dimensional feature vector and the 10-dimensional logits from the ResNeXT classifier (see Section <a href="#appendix: evaluation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="appendix: evaluation">10</a> in the Appendix for the detailed definitions):

- **Fréchet Inception Distance (FID)** measures both quality and diversity of generated samples, and favors generators that match moments in the feature space.

- **Inception Score (IS)** measures both quality and diversity of generated samples, and favors generated samples that can be clearly determined by the classifier.

- **Modified Inception Score (mIS)** measures the within-class diversity of samples in addition to IS.

- **AM Score** takes into consideration the marginal label distribution of training data compared to IS.

- **Number of Statistically-Different Bins (NDB)** measures diversity of generated samples.

**Results:** We randomly generate 1,000 audio samples from each model for evaluation. We report results in Table <a href="#tab: sc uncond" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab: sc uncond">[tab: sc uncond]</a>. Our DiffWave model outperforms baseline models under all metrics, including both automatic and human evaluation. Notably, the quality of audio samples generated by DiffWave is much higher than WaveNet and WaveGAN baselines (MOS: 3.39 vs. 1.43 and 2.03). Note that the quality of ground-truth audio exhibits large variations. The automatic evaluation metrics also indicate that DiffWave is better at quality, diversity, and matching marginal label distribution of training data.

<div class="tabular">

l \!width 1pt ccccc\|c **Model** & **FID**($`\downarrow`$) & **IS**($`\uparrow`$) & **mIS**($`\uparrow`$) & **AM**($`\downarrow`$) & **NDB$`/K`$**($`\downarrow`$) & **MOS**($`\uparrow`$)\
WaveNet-128 & 3.279 & 2.54 & 7.6 & 1.368 & 0.86 & $`1.34\pm0.29`$\
WaveNet-256 & 2.947 & 2.84 & 10.0 & 1.260 & 0.86 & $`1.43\pm0.30`$\
WaveGAN & 1.349 & 4.53 & 36.6 & 0.796 & 0.78 & $`2.03\pm0.33`$\
DiffWave & **1.287** & **5.30** & **59.4** & **0.636** & **0.74** & $`{\bf 3.39}\pm0.32`$\
Trainset & 0.000 & 8.48 & 281.4 & 0.164 & 0.00 & —\
Testset & 0.011 & 8.47 & 275.2 & 0.166 & 0.10 & $`3.72\pm0.28`$\

</div>

<div class="tabular">

l \!width 1pt cccc\|c **Model** & **Accuracy**($`\uparrow`$) & **FID-class**($`\downarrow`$) & **IS**($`\uparrow`$) & **mIS**($`\uparrow`$) & **MOS**($`\uparrow`$)\
WaveNet-128 &56.20% & 7.876$`\pm`$<!-- -->2.469 & 3.29 & 15.8 & $`1.46\pm0.30`$\
WaveNet-256 & 60.70% & 6.954$`\pm`$<!-- -->2.114 & 3.46 & 18.9 & $`1.58\pm0.36`$\
DiffWave & 91.20% & 1.113$`\pm`$<!-- -->0.569 & 6.63 & 117.4 & $`{\bf 3.50}\pm0.31`$\
DiffWave (deep & thin) & **94.00%** & **0.932**$`\pm`$<!-- -->0.450 & **6.92** & **133.8** & $`3.44\pm0.36`$\
Trainset & 99.06% & 0.000$`\pm`$<!-- -->0.000 & 8.48 & 281.4 & —\
Testset & 98.76% & 0.044$`\pm`$<!-- -->0.016 & 8.47 & 275.2 & $`3.72\pm0.28`$\

</div>

## Class-conditional generation

In this section, we provide the digit labels as the conditioner in DiffWave and compare our model to WaveNet. We omit the comparison with conditional WaveGAN due to its noisy output audio . For both DiffWave and WaveNet, the label conditioner is added to the model according to Section <a href="#subsec: conditional generation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsec: conditional generation">3.2</a>. We use the same dataset, model hyperparameters, and training settings as in Section <a href="#subsec: uncond_experiment" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsec: uncond_experiment">5.2</a>.

**Evaluation:** We use slightly different automatic evaluation methods in this section because audio samples are generated according to pre-specified discrete labels. The AM score and NDB are removed because they are less meaningful when the prior label distribution of generated data is specified. We keep IS and mIS because IS favors sharp, clear samples and mIS measures within-class diversity. We modify FID to FID-class: for each *digit* from 0 to 9, we compute FID between the generated audio samples that are pre-specified as this *digit* and training utterances with the same *digit* labels, and report the mean and standard deviation of these ten FID scores. We also report classification accuracy based on the ResNeXT classifier used in Section <a href="#subsec: uncond_experiment" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsec: uncond_experiment">5.2</a>.

**Results:** We randomly generate 100 audio samples for each digit (0 to 9) from all models for evaluation. We report results in Table <a href="#tab: sc cond" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab: sc cond">[tab: sc cond]</a>. Our DiffWave model significantly outperforms WaveNet on all evaluation metrics. It produces superior quality than WaveNet (MOS: 3.50 vs. 1.58), and greatly decreases the gap to ground-truth (the gap between DiffWave and ground-truth is $`\sim`$<!-- -->10% of the gap between WaveNet and ground-truth). The automatic evaluation metrics indicate that DiffWave is much better at speech clarity ($`>91\%`$ accuracy) and within-class diversity (its mIS is $`6\times`$ higher than WaveNet). We additionally found a deep and thin version of DiffWave with residual channels $`C=128`$ and 48 residual layers can achieve slightly better accuracy but lower audio quality. One may also compare quality of generated audio samples between conditional and unconditional generation based on IS, mIS, and MOS. For both WaveNet and DiffWave, IS increases by $`>`$<!-- -->20%, mIS almost doubles, and MOS increases by $`\geq0.11`$. These results indicate that the digit labels reduces the difficulty of the generative task and helps improving the generation quality of WaveNet and DiffWave.

## Additional results

**Zero-shot speech denoising:** The unconditional DiffWave model can readily perform speech denoising. The SC09 dataset provides six types of noises for data augmentation in recognition tasks: white noise, pink noise, running tap, exercise bike, dude miaowing, and doing the dishes. These noises are not used during the training phase of our unconditional DiffWave in Section <a href="#subsec: uncond_experiment" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsec: uncond_experiment">5.2</a>. We add 10% of each type of noise to test data, feed these noisy utterances into the reverse process at $`t = 25`$, and then obtain the outputs $`x_0`$’s. The audio samples are in Section V on the demo website. Note that our model is not trained on a denoising task and has zero knowledge about any noise type other than the white noise added in diffusion process. It indicates DiffWave learns a good prior of raw audio.

**Interpolation in latent space:** We can do interpolation with the digit conditioned DiffWave model in Section <a href="#subsec: cond_experiment" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsec: cond_experiment">5.3</a> on the SC09 dataset. The interpolation of voices $`x_0^a,x_0^b`$ between two speakers $`a, b`$ is done in the latent space at $`t = 50`$. We first sample $`x_t^a\sim q(x_t|x_0^a)`$ and $`x_t^b\sim q(x_t|x_0^b)`$ for the two speakers. We then do linear interpolation between $`x_t^a`$ and $`x_t^b`$: $`x_t^{\lambda}=(1-\lambda) x_t^a + \lambda x_t^b`$ for $`0<\lambda<1`$. Finally, we sample $`x_0^{\lambda}\sim p_{\theta}(x_0^{\lambda}|x_t^{\lambda})`$. The audio samples are in Section VI on the demo website.

# Conclusion

In this paper, we present DiffWave, a versatile generative model for raw waveform. In the neural vocoding task, it readily models the fine details of waveform conditioned on mel spectrogram and matches the strong autoregressive neural vocoder in terms of speech quality. In unconditional and class-conditional generation tasks, it properly captures the large variations within the data and produces realistic voices and consistent word-level pronunciations. To the best of our knowledge, DiffWave is the first waveform model that exhibits such versatility. DiffWave raises a number of open problems and provides broad opportunities for future research. For example, it would be meaningful to push the model to generate longer utterances, as DiffWave potentially has very large receptive fields. Second, optimizing the inference speed would be beneficial for applying the model in production TTS, because DiffWave is still slower than flow-based models. We found the most effective denoising steps in the reverse process occur near $`x_0`$, which suggests an even smaller $`T`$ is possible in DiffWave. In addition, the model parameters $`\theta`$ are shared across the reverse process, so the persistent kernels that stash the parameters on-chip would largely speed-up inference on GPUs .

# Proof of **Proposition** <a href="#prop:elbo" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="prop:elbo">1</a>

<div class="proof">

*Proof.* We expand the ELBO in <a href="#eq: elbo" data-reference-type="eqref" data-reference="eq: elbo">[eq: elbo]</a> into the sum of a sequence of tractable KL divergences below.
``` math
\begin{align}
    \mathrm{ELBO} & \displaystyle = \mathbb{E}_q\log\frac{p_{\theta}(x_0,\cdots,x_{T-1}|x_T)\times p_{\mathrm{latent}}(x_T)}{q(x_1,\cdots,x_T|x_0)} \nonumber \\
    & \displaystyle = \mathbb{E}_q\left(\log p_{\mathrm{latent}}(x_T)-\sum_{t=1}^T\log\frac{p_{\theta}(x_{t-1}|x_t)}{q(x_t|x_{t-1})}\right) \nonumber \\
    & \displaystyle= \mathbb{E}_q\left(\log p_{\mathrm{latent}}(x_T)-\log\frac{p_{\theta}(x_0|x_1)}{q(x_1|x_0)}-\sum_{t=2}^T\left(\log\frac{p_{\theta}(x_{t-1}|x_t)}{q(x_{t-1}|x_t,x_0)}+\log\frac{q(x_{t-1}|x_0)}{q(x_t|x_0)}\right)\right) \nonumber \\ 
    & \displaystyle = \mathbb{E}_q\left(\log \frac{p_{\mathrm{latent}}(x_T)}{q(x_T|x_0)}-\log p_{\theta}(x_0|x_1)-\sum_{t=2}^T\log\frac{p_{\theta}(x_{t-1}|x_t)}{q(x_{t-1}|x_t,x_0)}\right) \nonumber \\
    & \displaystyle = -\mathbb{E}_q\left(\mathrm{KL}\left(q(x_T|x_0)\|p_{\mathrm{latent}}(x_T)\right)+\sum_{t=2}^T \mathrm{KL}\left(q(x_{t-1}|x_t,x_0)\|p_{\theta}(x_{t-1}|x_t)\right)-\log p_{\theta}(x_0|x_1)\right)
    \label{eq: elbo_expand}
\end{align}
```

Before we calculate these terms individually, we first derive $`q(x_t|x_0)`$ and $`q(x_{t-1}|x_t,x_0)`$. Let $`\epsilon_i`$’s be independent standard Gaussian random variables. Then, by definition of $`q`$ and using the notations of constants introduced in <a href="#eq: const" data-reference-type="eqref" data-reference="eq: const">[eq: const]</a>, we have
``` math
\begin{array}{rl}
    x_t & =\sqrt{\alpha_t}x_{t-1}+\sqrt{\beta_t}\epsilon_t \\
     & = \sqrt{\alpha_t\alpha_{t-1}}x_{t-2}+\sqrt{\alpha_t\beta_{t-1}}\epsilon_{t-1}+\sqrt{\beta_t}\epsilon_t \\
     & = \sqrt{\alpha_t\alpha_{t-1}\alpha_{t-1}}x_{t-3}+\sqrt{\alpha_t\alpha_{t-1}\beta_{t-2}}\epsilon_{t-2}+\sqrt{\alpha_t\beta_{t-1}}\epsilon_{t-1}+\sqrt{\beta_t}\epsilon_t \\
     & = \cdots \\
     & = \sqrt{\bar{\alpha}_t}x_0 + \sqrt{\alpha_t\alpha_{t-1}\cdots\alpha_2\beta_1}\epsilon_1+\cdots+\sqrt{\alpha_t\beta_{t-1}}\epsilon_{t-1}+\sqrt{\beta_t}\epsilon_t 
\end{array}
```
Note that $`q(x_t|x_0)`$ is still Gaussian, and the mean of $`x_t`$ is $`\sqrt{\bar{\alpha}_t}x_0`$, and the variance matrix is $`(\alpha_t\alpha_{t-1}\cdots\alpha_2\beta_1+\cdots+\alpha_t\beta_{t-1}+\beta_t) I = (1-\bar{\alpha}_t) I`$. Therefore,
``` math
\begin{align}
q(x_t|x_0)=\gN(x_t;~ \sqrt{\bar{\alpha}_t}x_0,~ (1-\bar{\alpha}_t)  I).
\end{align}
```
It is worth mentioning that,
``` math
\begin{align}
    q(x_T|x_0)=\gN(x_T;~ \sqrt{\bar{\alpha}_T}x_0,~ (1-\bar{\alpha}_T) I),
\label{eq: q(xT|x0)}
\end{align}
```
where $`\bar{\alpha}_T = \prod_{t=1}^T (1 - \beta_t)`$ approaches zero with large $`T`$.

Next, by Bayes rule and Markov chain property,
``` math
\begin{array}{rl}
    q(x_{t-1}|x_t,x_0) 
    & \displaystyle = \frac{q(x_t|x_{t-1})~q(x_{t-1}|x_0)}{q(x_t|x_0)} \\
    & \displaystyle = \frac{\gN(x_t;\sqrt{\alpha_t}x_{t-1},\beta_tI) ~\gN(x_{t-1};\sqrt{\bar{\alpha}_{t-1}}x_0,(1-\bar{\alpha}_{t-1})I)}{\gN(x_t;\sqrt{\bar{\alpha}_t}x_0,(1-\bar{\alpha}_t)I)} \\
    & \displaystyle = (2\pi\beta_t)^{-\frac d2}(2\pi(1-\bar{\alpha}_{t-1}))^{-\frac d2}(2\pi(1-\bar{\alpha}_t))^{\frac d2}\times \\
    & \displaystyle ~~~~ \exp\left(-\frac{\|x_t-\sqrt{\alpha_t}x_{t-1}\|^2}{2\beta_t}-\frac{\|x_{t-1}-\sqrt{\bar{\alpha}_{t-1}}x_0\|^2}{2(1-\bar{\alpha}_{t-1})}+\frac{\|x_t-\sqrt{\bar{\alpha}_t}x_0\|^2}{2(1-\bar{\alpha}_t)}\right) \\
    & \displaystyle = (2\pi\tilde{\beta}_t)^{-\frac d2}\exp\left(-\frac{1}{2\tilde{\beta}_t}\left\|x_{t-1}-\frac{\sqrt{\bar{\alpha}_{t-1}}\beta_t}{1-\bar{\alpha}_t}x_0-\frac{\sqrt{\alpha_t}(1-\bar{\alpha}_{t-1})}{1-\bar{\alpha}_t}x_t\right\|^2\right)
\end{array}
```
Therefore,
``` math
\begin{align}
q(x_{t-1}|x_t,x_0) = 
\gN(x_{t-1};\frac{\sqrt{\bar{\alpha}_{t-1}}\beta_t}{1-\bar{\alpha}_t}x_0+\frac{\sqrt{\alpha_t}(1-\bar{\alpha}_{t-1})}{1-\bar{\alpha}_t}x_t, \tilde{\beta}_t I) .
\end{align}
```
Now, we calculate each term of the ELBO expansion in <a href="#eq: elbo_expand" data-reference-type="eqref" data-reference="eq: elbo_expand">[eq: elbo_expand]</a>. The first constant term is
``` math
\begin{array}{rl}
    \mathbb{E}_q~ \mathrm{KL}\left(q(x_T|x_0)\|p_{\mathrm{latent}}(x_T)\right) 
    & \displaystyle = \mathbb{E}_{x_0}\mathrm{KL}\left(\gN(\sqrt{\bar{\alpha}_T}x_0, (1-\bar{\alpha}_T)I)\|\gN(0,I)\right) \\
    & \displaystyle = \frac12 \mathbb{E}_{x_0}\|\sqrt{\bar{\alpha}_T}x_0-0\|^2 + d\left(\log\frac{1}{\sqrt{1-\bar{\alpha}_T}}+\frac{1-\bar{\alpha}_T-1}{2}\right) \\
    & \displaystyle = \frac{\bar{\alpha}_T}{2}\mathbb{E}_{x_0}\|x_0\|^2 -\frac d2 (\bar{\alpha}_T+\log(1-\bar{\alpha}_T))
\end{array}
```
Next, we compute $`\mathrm{KL}\left(q(x_{t-1}|x_t,x_0)\|p_{\theta}(x_{t-1}|x_t)\right)`$. Because both $`q(x_{t-1}|x_t,x_0)`$ and $`p_{\theta}(x_{t-1}|x_t)`$ are Gaussian with the same covariance matrix $`\tilde{\beta}_tI`$, the KL divergence between them is $`\frac{1}{2\tilde{\beta}_t}`$ times the squared $`\ell_2`$ distance between their means. By the expression of $`q(x_t|x_0)`$, we have $`x_t=\sqrt{\bar{\alpha}_t}x_0+\sqrt{1-\bar{\alpha}_t}\epsilon`$. Therefore, we have
``` math
\begin{array}{l}
    \mathbb{E}_q~ \mathrm{KL}\left(q(x_{t-1}|x_t,x_0)\|p_{\theta}(x_{t-1}|x_t)\right) \\
    \displaystyle = \frac{1}{2\tilde{\beta}_t}\mathbb{E}_{x_0} \left\|\frac{\sqrt{\bar{\alpha}_{t-1}}\beta_t}{1-\bar{\alpha}_t}x_0+\frac{\sqrt{\alpha_t}(1-\bar{\alpha}_{t-1})}{1-\bar{\alpha}_t}x_t-\frac{1}{\sqrt{\alpha_t}}\left(x_t-\frac{\beta_t}{\sqrt{1-\bar{\alpha}_t}}\epsilon_{\theta}(x_t,t)\right)\right\|^2 \\
    \displaystyle = \frac{1}{2\tilde{\beta}_t}\mathbb{E}_{x_0,\epsilon} \left\|\frac{\sqrt{\bar{\alpha}_{t-1}}\beta_t}{1-\bar{\alpha}_t}\cdot\frac{x_t-\sqrt{1-\bar{\alpha}_t}\epsilon}{\sqrt{\bar{\alpha}_t}}+\frac{\sqrt{\alpha_t}(1-\bar{\alpha}_{t-1})}{1-\bar{\alpha}_t}x_t-\frac{1}{\sqrt{\alpha_t}}\left(x_t-\frac{\beta_t}{\sqrt{1-\bar{\alpha}_t}}\epsilon_{\theta}(x_t,t)\right)\right\|^2 \\
    \displaystyle = \frac{1}{2\tilde{\beta}_t}\cdot\frac{\beta_t^2}{\alpha_t(1-\bar{\alpha}_t)}\mathbb{E}_{x_0,\epsilon} \left\|0\cdot x_t+\epsilon-\epsilon_{\theta}(x_t,t)\right\|^2 \\
    \displaystyle = \frac{\beta_t^2}{2\frac{1-\bar{\alpha}_{t-1}}{1-\bar{\alpha}_t}\beta_t\alpha_t(1-\bar{\alpha}_t)}\mathbb{E}_{x_0,\epsilon} \left\|\epsilon-\epsilon_{\theta}(x_t,t)\right\|^2 \\
    \displaystyle = \frac{\beta_t}{2\alpha_t(1-\bar{\alpha}_{t-1})}\mathbb{E}_{x_0,\epsilon} \left\|\epsilon-\epsilon_{\theta}(x_t,t)\right\|^2
\end{array}
```
Finally, as $`x_1=\sqrt{\bar{\alpha}_1}x_0+\sqrt{1-\bar{\alpha}_1}\epsilon=\sqrt{\alpha_1}x_0+\sqrt{1-\alpha_1}\epsilon`$, we have
``` math
\begin{array}{rl}
    \mathbb{E}_q\log p_{\theta}(x_0|x_1) 
    & \displaystyle = \mathbb{E}_q \log\gN\left(x_0;\frac{1}{\sqrt{\alpha_1}}\left(x_1-\frac{\beta_1}{\sqrt{1-\alpha_1}}\epsilon_{\theta}(x_1,1)\right),\beta_1I\right) \\
    & \displaystyle = \mathbb{E}_q\left(-\frac d2\log2\pi\beta_1-\frac{1}{2\beta_1}\left\|x_0-\frac{1}{\sqrt{\alpha_1}}\left(x_1-\frac{\beta_1}{\sqrt{1-\alpha_1}}\epsilon_{\theta}(x_1,1)\right)\right\|^2\right) \\
     & \displaystyle = -\frac d2\log2\pi\beta_1-\frac{1}{2\beta_1}\mathbb{E}_{x_0,\epsilon}\left\|x_0-\frac{1}{\sqrt{\alpha_1}}\left(\sqrt{\alpha_1}x_0+\sqrt{1-\alpha_1}\epsilon-\frac{\beta_1}{\sqrt{1-\alpha_1}}\epsilon_{\theta}(x_1,1)\right)\right\|^2 \\
     & \displaystyle = -\frac d2\log2\pi\beta_1-\frac{1}{2\beta_1}\mathbb{E}_{x_0,\epsilon}\left\|\frac{\sqrt{\beta_1}}{\sqrt{\alpha_1}}(\epsilon-\epsilon_{\theta}(x_1,1))\right\|^2 \\
      & \displaystyle = -\frac d2\log2\pi\beta_1-\frac{1}{2\alpha_1}\mathbb{E}_{x_0,\epsilon}\|\epsilon-\epsilon_{\theta}(x_1,1)\|^2
\end{array}
```
The computation of the ELBO is now finished. ◻

</div>

# Details of the Fast Sampling Algorithm

Let $`T_{\mathrm{infer}}\ll T`$ be the number of steps in the reverse process (sampling) and $`\{\eta_t\}_{t=1}^{T_{\mathrm{infer}}}`$ be the user-defined variance schedule, which can be independent with the training variance schedule $`\{\beta_t\}_{t=1}^T`$. Then, we compute the corresponding constants in the same way as <a href="#eq: const" data-reference-type="eqref" data-reference="eq: const">[eq: const]</a>:

``` math
\begin{equation}
\label{eq: const fast}
\gamma_t = 1 - \eta_t, ~~ \bar{\gamma}_t = \prod_{s=1}^t\gamma_s, ~~ \tilde{\eta}_t=\frac{1-\bar{\gamma}_{t-1}}{1-\bar{\gamma}_t}\eta_t ~~\text{ for}~~ t>1 ~~\text{and}~~ \tilde{\eta}_1=\eta_1.
\end{equation}
```

As step $`s`$ during sampling, we need to select an $`t`$ and use $`\epsilon_{\theta}(\cdot,t)`$ to eliminate noise. This is realized by aligning the noise levels from the user-defined and the training variance schedules. Ideally, we want $`\sqrt{\bar{\alpha}_t}=\sqrt{\bar{\gamma}_s}`$. However, since this is not always possible, we interpolate $`\sqrt{\bar{\gamma}_s}`$ between two consecutive training noise levels $`\sqrt{\bar{\alpha}_{t+1}}`$ and $`\sqrt{\bar{\alpha}_t}`$, if $`\sqrt{\bar{\gamma}_s}`$ is between them. We therefore obtain the desired aligned diffusion step $`t`$, which we denote $`t_s^{\mathrm{align}}`$, via the following equation:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\label{eq: aligned step}
    t_s^{\mathrm{align}} = t + \frac{\sqrt{\bar{\alpha}_t}-\sqrt{\bar{\gamma}_s}}{\sqrt{\bar{\alpha}_t}-\sqrt{\bar{\alpha}_{t+1}}} \quad \text{ if }\sqrt{\bar{\gamma}_s}\in[\ \sqrt{\bar{\alpha}_{t+1}}, \sqrt{\bar{\alpha}_t}\ ].
\end{equation}
```
Note that, $`t_s^{\mathrm{align}}`$ is floating-point number, which is different from the integer diffusion-step at training.

Finally, the parameterizations of $`\mu_{\theta}`$ and $`\sigma_{\theta}`$ are defined in a similar way as <a href="#eq: parameterization" data-reference-type="eqref" data-reference="eq: parameterization">[eq: parameterization]</a>:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\label{eq: parameterization fast}
\mu_{\theta}^{\mathrm{fast}}(x_s, s) = \frac{1}{\sqrt{\gamma_s}}\left(x_s-\frac{\eta_s}{\sqrt{1-\bar{\gamma}_s}}\epsilon_{\theta}(x_s, t_s^{\mathrm{align}})\right), \text{ ~and~ } \sigma_{\theta}^{\mathrm{fast}}(x_s, s) = \tilde{\eta}_s^{\frac12}.
\end{equation}
```

The fast sampling algorithm is summarized in Algorithm <a href="#alg: sampling fast" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="alg: sampling fast">[alg: sampling fast]</a>.

<div class="algorithm">

<div class="algorithmic">

Sample $`x_{T_{\mathrm{infer}}}\sim p_{\mathrm{latent}}=\gN(0,I)`$ Compute $`\mu^{\mathrm{fast}}_{\theta}(x_s,s)`$ and $`\sigma^{\mathrm{fast}}_{\theta}(x_s,s)`$ using <a href="#eq: parameterization fast" data-reference-type="eqref" data-reference="eq: parameterization fast">[eq: parameterization fast]</a> Sample $`x_{s-1}\sim \gN(x_{s-1};\mu_{\theta}^{\mathrm{fast}}(x_s,s), \sigma_{\theta}^{\mathrm{fast}}(x_s,s)^2I)`$

</div>

</div>

In neural vocoding task, we use user-defined variance schedules $`\{0.0001, 0.001, 0.01, 0.05, 0.2, 0.7\}`$ for $`\text{DiffWave}_{\text{ LARGE}}`$ and $`\{0.0001, 0.001, 0.01, 0.05, 0.2, 0.5\}`$ for $`\text{DiffWave}_{\text{ BASE}}`$ in Section <a href="#subsec: vocoder_experiment" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsec: vocoder_experiment">5.1</a>.

The fast sampling algorithm is similar to the sampling algorithm in in the sense of considering the noise levels as a controllable variable during sampling. However, the fast sampling algorithm for DiffWave does not need to modify the training procedure (Algorithm <a href="#alg: training" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="alg: training">[alg: training]</a>), and can just reuse the trained model checkpoint with large $`T`$.

# Details of the Model Architecture

<figure id="fig: architecture detailed" data-latex-placement="!h">
<embed src="plots/Architecture_detailed.pdf" style="width:95.0%" />
<figcaption>The network architecture of DiffWave in modeling <span class="math inline"><em>ϵ</em><sub><em>θ</em></sub>(<em>x</em><sub><em>t</em></sub>, <em>t</em>)</span>, including tensor shapes at each stage and activation functions. <span class="math inline"><em>B</em></span> is the batch size, <span class="math inline"><em>C</em></span> is the number of residual/skip channels of the network, and <span class="math inline"><em>L</em></span> is data dimension.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig: receptive fields" data-latex-placement="!h">
<embed src="plots/receptive_fields.pdf" style="width:96.0%" />
<figcaption>The Receptive fields of the output units within DiffWave network.</figcaption>
</figure>

# Details of Automatic Evaluation Metrics in Section <a href="#subsec: uncond_experiment" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsec: uncond_experiment">5.2</a> and <a href="#subsec: cond_experiment" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsec: cond_experiment">5.3</a>

The automatic evaluation metrics used in Section <a href="#subsec: uncond_experiment" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsec: uncond_experiment">5.2</a> and <a href="#subsec: cond_experiment" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsec: cond_experiment">5.3</a> are described as follows. Given an input audio $`x`$, an 1024-dimensional feature vector (denoted as $`\mathcal{F}_{\mathrm{feature}}(x)`$) is computed by the ResNeXT $`\mathcal{F}`$, and is then transformed to the 10-dimensional multinomial distribution (denoted as $`p_{\mathcal{F}}(x)`$) with a fully connected layer and a softmax layer. Let $`X_{\mathrm{train}}`$ be the trainset, $`p_{\mathrm{gen}}`$ be the distribution of generated data, and $`X_{\mathrm{gen}}\sim p_{\mathrm{gen}}(i.i.d.)`$ be the set of generated audio samples. Then, we compute the following automatic evaluation metrics:

- **Fréchet Inception Distance (FID)** computes the Wasserstein-2 distance between Gaussians fitted to $`\mathcal{F}_{\mathrm{feature}}(X_{\mathrm{train}})`$ and $`\mathcal{F}_{\mathrm{feature}}(X_{\mathrm{gen}})`$. That is,
  ``` math
  \begin{equation*}
          \mathrm{FID}=\|\mu_g-\mu_t\|^2+\mathrm{Tr}\left(\Sigma_t+\Sigma_g-2(\Sigma_t\Sigma_g)^{\frac12}\right),
  \end{equation*}
  ```
  where $`\mu_t,\Sigma_t`$ are the mean vector and covariance matrix of $`\mathcal{F}_{\mathrm{feature}}(X_{\mathrm{train}})`$, and where $`\mu_g,\Sigma_g`$ are the mean vector and covariance matrix of $`\mathcal{F}_{\mathrm{feature}}(X_{\mathrm{gen}})`$.

- **Inception Score (IS)** computes the following:
  ``` math
  \begin{equation*}
          \mathrm{IS}=\exp\left(\mathbb{E}_{x\sim p_{\mathrm{gen}}}\mathrm{KL}\left(p_{\mathcal{F}}(x)\|\mathbb{E}_{x'\sim p_{\mathrm{gen}}}p_{\mathcal{F}}(x')\right)\right),
  \end{equation*}
  ```
  where $`\mathbb{E}_{x'\sim p_{\mathrm{gen}}}p_{\mathcal{F}}(x')`$ is the marginal label distribution.

- **Modified Inception Score (mIS)** computes the following:
  ``` math
  \begin{equation*}
          \mathrm{mIS}=\exp\left(\mathbb{E}_{x,x'\sim p_{\mathrm{gen}}}\mathrm{KL}\left(p_{\mathcal{F}}(x)\|p_{\mathcal{F}}(x')\right)\right).
  \end{equation*}
  ```

- **AM Score** computes the following:
  ``` math
  \begin{equation*}
          \mathrm{AM}=\mathrm{KL}\left(\mathbb{E}_{x'\sim\qdata}p_{\mathcal{F}}(x')\|\mathbb{E}_{x\sim p_{\mathrm{gen}}}p_{\mathcal{F}}(x)\right)
          +\mathbb{E}_{x\sim p_{\mathrm{gen}}}\mathrm{H}(p_{\mathcal{F}}(x)),
  \end{equation*}
  ```
  where $`\mathrm{H}(\cdot)`$ computes the entropy. Compared to IS, AM score takes into consideration the the prior distribution of $`p_{\mathcal{F}}(X_{\mathrm{train}})`$.

- **Number of Statistically-Different Bins (NDB)** : First, $`X_{\mathrm{train}}`$ is clustered into $`K`$ bins by $`K`$-Means in the feature space (where $`K=50`$ in our evaluation). Next, each sample in $`X_{\mathrm{gen}}`$ is assigned to its nearest bin. Then, NDB is the number of bins that contain statistically different proportion of samples between training samples and generated samples.

[^1]: Audio samples are in: <https://diffwave-demo.github.io/>

[^2]: Contributed to the work during an internship at Baidu Research, USA.

[^3]: One can find that $`q(x_T | x_0)`$ approaches to isotropic Gaussian with large $`T`$ in <a href="#eq: q(xT|x0)" data-reference-type="eqref" data-reference="eq: q(xT|x0)">[eq: q(xT|x0)]</a> in the Appendix <a href="#appendix: proof" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="appendix: proof">7</a>.

[^4]: Indeed, we found the causal dilated convolution architecture leads to worse audio quality in DiffWave.

[^5]: The MOS evaluation for DiffWave(Fast) with $`T_{\text{infer}} = 6`$ was done after paper submission and may not be directly comparable to previous scores.

## References

1. Yang Ai and Zhen-Hua Ling.
\newblock A neural vocoder with hierarchical generation of amplitude and phase
  spectra for statistical parametric speech synthesis.
\newblock \emph{IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language
  Processing}, 28:\penalty0 839--851, 2020.
2. Sercan~\"{O}. Ar{\i}k, Mike Chrzanowski, Adam Coates, Gregory Diamos, Andrew
  Gibiansky, Yongguo Kang, Xian Li, John Miller, Jonathan Raiman, Shubho
  Sengupta, and Mohammad Shoeybi.
\newblock Deep {V}oice: Real-time neural text-to-speech.
\newblock In \emph{ICML}, 2017{\natexlab{a}}.
3. Sercan~\"{O}. Ar{\i}k, Gregory Diamos, Andrew Gibiansky, John Miller, Kainan
  Peng, Wei Ping, Jonathan Raiman, and Yanqi Zhou.
\newblock Deep {V}oice 2: Multi-speaker neural text-to-speech.
\newblock In \emph{NIPS}, 2017{\natexlab{b}}.
4. Miko{\l}aj Bi{\'n}kowski, Jeff Donahue, Sander Dieleman, Aidan Clark, Erich
  Elsen, Norman Casagrande, Luis~C Cobo, and Karen Simonyan.
\newblock High fidelity speech synthesis with adversarial networks.
\newblock In \emph{ICLR}, 2020.
5. Andrew Brock, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan.
\newblock Large scale {GAN} training for high fidelity natural image synthesis.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.11096}, 2018. [arXiv:1809.11096](https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.11096)
6. Nanxin Chen, Yu~Zhang, Heiga Zen, Ron~J Weiss, Mohammad Norouzi, and William
  Chan.
\newblock Wave{G}rad: Estimating gradients for waveform generation.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.00713}, 2020. [arXiv:2009.00713](https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.00713)
7. Greg Diamos, Shubho Sengupta, Bryan Catanzaro, Mike Chrzanowski, Adam Coates,
  Erich Elsen, Jesse Engel, Awni Hannun, and Sanjeev Satheesh.
\newblock Persistent rnns: Stashing recurrent weights on-chip.
\newblock In \emph{International Conference on Machine Learning}, pp.\
  2024--2033, 2016.
8. Chris Donahue, Julian McAuley, and Miller Puckette.
\newblock Adversarial audio synthesis.
\newblock In \emph{ICLR}, 2019.
9. Jeff Donahue, Sander Dieleman, Miko{\l}aj Bi{\'n}kowski, Erich Elsen, and Karen
  Simonyan.
\newblock End-to-end adversarial text-to-speech.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.03575}, 2020. [arXiv:2006.03575](./2006.03575.md)
10. Jesse Engel, Kumar~Krishna Agrawal, Shuo Chen, Ishaan Gulrajani, Chris Donahue,
  and Adam Roberts.
\newblock Gansynth: Adversarial neural audio synthesis.
\newblock In \emph{ICLR}, 2019.
11. Jesse Engel, Lamtharn Hantrakul, Chenjie Gu, and Adam Roberts.
\newblock Ddsp: Differentiable digital signal processing.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.04643}, 2020. [arXiv:2001.04643](https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.04643)
12. Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley,
  Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio.
\newblock Generative adversarial nets.
\newblock In \emph{Advances in neural information processing systems}, pp.\
  2672--2680, 2014.
13. Anirudh Goyal Alias~Parth Goyal, Nan~Rosemary Ke, Surya Ganguli, and Yoshua
  Bengio.
\newblock Variational walkback: Learning a transition operator as a stochastic
  recurrent net.
\newblock In \emph{Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems}, pp.\
  4392--4402, 2017.
14. Swaminathan Gurumurthy, Ravi Kiran~Sarvadevabhatla, and R~Venkatesh~Babu.
\newblock Deligan: Generative adversarial networks for diverse and limited
  data.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pp.\  166--174, 2017.
15. Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp
  Hochreiter.
\newblock Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash
  equilibrium.
\newblock In \emph{Advances in neural information processing systems}, pp.\
  6626--6637, 2017.
16. Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel.
\newblock Denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.11239}, 2020. [arXiv:2006.11239](https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.11239)
17. Keith Ito.
\newblock The {LJ} speech dataset.
\newblock 2017.
18. Nal Kalchbrenner, Erich Elsen, Karen Simonyan, Seb Noury, Norman Casagrande,
  Edward Lockhart, Florian Stimberg, Aaron van~den Oord, Sander Dieleman, and
  Koray Kavukcuoglu.
\newblock Efficient neural audio synthesis.
\newblock In \emph{ICML}, 2018.
19. Sungwon Kim, Sang-gil Lee, Jongyoon Song, and Sungroh Yoon.
\newblock Flo{W}ave{N}et: A generative flow for raw audio.
\newblock In \emph{ICML}, 2019.
20. Diederik~P Kingma and Jimmy Ba.
\newblock Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.
\newblock In \emph{ICLR}, 2015.
21. Diederik~P Kingma and Max Welling.
\newblock Auto-encoding variational {B}ayes.
\newblock In \emph{ICLR}, 2014.
22. Kundan Kumar, Rithesh Kumar, Thibault de~Boissiere, Lucas Gestin, Wei~Zhen
  Teoh, Jose Sotelo, Alexandre de~Br{\'e}bisson, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron~C
  Courville.
\newblock Melgan: Generative adversarial networks for conditional waveform
  synthesis.
\newblock In \emph{Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems}, pp.\
  14881--14892, 2019.
23. Chae~Young Lee, Anoop Toffy, Gue~Jun Jung, and Woo-Jin Han.
\newblock Conditional wavegan.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.10636}, 2018. [arXiv:1809.10636](https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.10636)
24. Francesc Llu{\'\i}s, Jordi Pons, and Xavier Serra.
\newblock End-to-end music source separation: is it possible in the waveform
  domain?
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.12187}, 2018. [arXiv:1810.12187](https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.12187)
25. Soroush Mehri, Kundan Kumar, Ishaan Gulrajani, Rithesh Kumar, Shubham Jain,
  Jose Sotelo, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio.
\newblock Sample{RNN}: An unconditional end-to-end neural audio generation
  model.
\newblock In \emph{ICLR}, 2017.
26. Kasperi Palkama, Lauri Juvela, and Alexander Ilin.
\newblock Conditional spoken digit generation with stylegan.
\newblock In \emph{Interspeech}, 2020.
27. Kainan Peng, Wei Ping, Zhao Song, and Kexin Zhao.
\newblock Non-autoregressive neural text-to-speech.
\newblock In \emph{ICML}, 2020.
28. Wei Ping, Kainan Peng, Andrew Gibiansky, Sercan~O Arik, Ajay Kannan, Sharan
  Narang, Jonathan Raiman, and John Miller.
\newblock Deep {V}oice 3: Scaling text-to-speech with convolutional sequence
  learning.
\newblock In \emph{ICLR}, 2018.
29. Wei Ping, Kainan Peng, and Jitong Chen.
\newblock Clari{N}et: Parallel wave generation in end-to-end text-to-speech.
\newblock In \emph{ICLR}, 2019.
30. Wei Ping, Kainan Peng, Kexin Zhao, and Zhao Song.
\newblock Wave{F}low: A compact flow-based model for raw audio.
\newblock In \emph{ICML}, 2020.
31. Ryan Prenger, Rafael Valle, and Bryan Catanzaro.
\newblock Wave{G}low: A flow-based generative network for speech synthesis.
\newblock In \emph{IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
  Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, 2019.
32. Yi~Ren, Yangjun Ruan, Xu~Tan, Tao Qin, Sheng Zhao, Zhou Zhao, and Tie-Yan Liu.
\newblock Fastspeech: Fast, robust and controllable text to speech.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.09263}, 2019. [arXiv:1905.09263](../2019/1905.09263.md)
33. Dario Rethage, Jordi Pons, and Xavier Serra.
\newblock A wavenet for speech denoising.
\newblock In \emph{2018 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
  Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pp.\  5069--5073. IEEE, 2018.
34. Fl{\'a}vio Ribeiro, Dinei Flor{\^e}ncio, Cha Zhang, and Michael Seltzer.
\newblock Crowd{MOS}: An approach for crowdsourcing mean opinion score studies.
\newblock In \emph{ICASSP}, 2011.
35. Eitan Richardson and Yair Weiss.
\newblock On gans and gmms.
\newblock In \emph{Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems}, pp.\
  5847--5858, 2018.
36. Tim Salimans, Ian Goodfellow, Wojciech Zaremba, Vicki Cheung, Alec Radford, and
  Xi~Chen.
\newblock Improved techniques for training gans.
\newblock In \emph{Advances in neural information processing systems}, pp.\
  2234--2242, 2016.
37. Jonathan Shen, Ruoming Pang, Ron~J Weiss, Mike Schuster, Navdeep Jaitly,
  Zongheng Yang, Zhifeng Chen, Yu~Zhang, Yuxuan Wang, RJ~Skerry-Ryan, et~al.
\newblock Natural {TTS} synthesis by conditioning {W}ave{N}et on mel
  spectrogram predictions.
\newblock In \emph{ICASSP}, 2018.
38. Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric~A Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli.
\newblock Deep unsupervised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.03585}, 2015. [arXiv:1503.03585](https://arxiv.org/abs/1503.03585)
39. Yang Song and Stefano Ermon.
\newblock Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution.
\newblock In \emph{Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems}, pp.\
  11918--11930, 2019.
40. Yang Song and Stefano Ermon.
\newblock Improved techniques for training score-based generative models.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.09011}, 2020. [arXiv:2006.09011](https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.09011)
41. Jose Sotelo, Soroush Mehri, Kundan Kumar, Joao~Felipe Santos, Kyle Kastner,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio.
\newblock Char2wav: End-to-end speech synthesis.
\newblock \emph{ICLR workshop}, 2017.
42. Yaniv Taigman, Lior Wolf, Adam Polyak, and Eliya Nachmani.
\newblock Voice{L}oop: Voice fitting and synthesis via a phonological loop.
\newblock In \emph{ICLR}, 2018.
43. Rafael Valle, Kevin Shih, Ryan Prenger, and Bryan Catanzaro.
\newblock Flowtron: an autoregressive flow-based generative network for
  text-to-speech synthesis.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.05957}, 2020. [arXiv:2005.05957](./2005.05957.md)
44. Aaron van~den Oord, Sander Dieleman, Heiga Zen, Karen Simonyan, Oriol Vinyals,
  Alex Graves, Nal Kalchbrenner, Andrew Senior, and Koray Kavukcuoglu.
\newblock Wave{N}et: A generative model for raw audio.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.03499}, 2016. [arXiv:1609.03499](https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.03499)
45. Aaron van~den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, and Koray Kavukcuoglu.
\newblock Neural discrete representation learning.
\newblock In \emph{Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems}, pp.\
  6306--6315, 2017.
46. Aaron van~den Oord, Yazhe Li, Igor Babuschkin, Karen Simonyan, Oriol Vinyals,
  Koray Kavukcuoglu, George van~den Driessche, Edward Lockhart, Luis~C Cobo,
  Florian Stimberg, et~al.
\newblock Parallel {W}ave{N}et: Fast high-fidelity speech synthesis.
\newblock In \emph{ICML}, 2018.
47. Sean Vasquez and Mike Lewis.
\newblock Melnet: A generative model for audio in the frequency domain.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.01083}, 2019. [arXiv:1906.01083](../2019/1906.01083.md)
48. Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones,
  Aidan~N Gomez, {\L}ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin.
\newblock Attention is all you need.
\newblock In \emph{Advances in neural information processing systems}, pp.\
  5998--6008, 2017.
49. Xin Wang, Shinji Takaki, and Junichi Yamagishi.
\newblock Neural source-filter-based waveform model for statistical parametric
  speech synthesis.
\newblock In \emph{ICASSP 2019-2019 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
  Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pp.\  5916--5920. IEEE, 2019.
50. Yuxuan Wang, RJ~Skerry-Ryan, Daisy Stanton, Yonghui Wu, Ron~J Weiss, Navdeep
  Jaitly, Zongheng Yang, Ying Xiao, Zhifeng Chen, Samy Bengio, Quoc Le, Yannis
  Agiomyrgiannakis, Rob Clark, and Rif~A. Saurous.
\newblock Tacotron: Towards end-to-end speech synthesis.
\newblock In \emph{Interspeech}, 2017.
51. Pete Warden.
\newblock Speech commands: A dataset for limited-vocabulary speech recognition.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.03209}, 2018. [arXiv:1804.03209](https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.03209)
52. Saining Xie, Ross Girshick, Piotr Doll{\'a}r, Zhuowen Tu, and Kaiming He.
\newblock Aggregated residual transformations for deep neural networks.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pp.\  1492--1500, 2017.
53. Yuan Xu and Erdene-Ochir Tuguldur.
\newblock \emph{Convolutional neural networks for Google speech commands data
  set with PyTorch}, 2017.
\newblock \url{https://github.com/tugstugi/pytorch-speech-commands}.
54. Ryuichi Yamamoto, Eunwoo Song, and Jae-Min Kim.
\newblock Parallel wavegan: A fast waveform generation model based on
  generative adversarial networks with multi-resolution spectrogram.
\newblock In \emph{ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
  Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pp.\  6199--6203. IEEE, 2020.
55. Zhiming Zhou, Han Cai, Shu Rong, Yuxuan Song, Kan Ren, Weinan Zhang, Yong Yu,
  and Jun Wang.
\newblock Activation maximization generative adversarial nets.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.02000}, 2017. [arXiv:1703.02000](https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.02000)
