---
arxiv_id: '1907.04917'
title: A Novel Approach to OCR using Image Recognition based Classification for Ancient
  Tamil Inscriptions in Temples
authors:
- Lalitha Giridhar
- Aishwarya Dharani and
- Velmathi Guruviah
submitted: '2019-07-04'
categories:
- cs.CV
- eess.IV
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.04917
source: metadata-only
converter: none
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 0/0
citations_resolved_at: '2026-07-07T16:50:26+00:00'
references_parsed: 0
arxiv_version: ''
---

## Abstract

Recognition of ancient Tamil characters has always been a challenge for epigraphers. This is primarily because the language has evolved over the several centuries and the character set over this time has both expanded and diversified. This proposed work focuses on improving optical character recognition techniques for ancient Tamil script which was in use between the 7th and 12th centuries. While comprehensively curating a functional data set for ancient Tamil characters is an arduous task, in this work, a data set has been curated using cropped images of characters found on certain temple inscriptions, specific to this time as a case study. After using Otsu thresholding method for binarization of the image a two dimensional convolution neural network is defined and used to train, classify and, recognize the ancient Tamil characters. To implement the optical character recognition techniques, the neural network is linked to the Tesseract using the pytesseract library of Python. As an added feature, the work also incorporates Google's text to speech voice engine to produce an audio output of the digitized text. Various samples for both modern and ancient Tamil were collected and passed through the system. It is found that for Tamil inscriptions studied over the considered time period, a combined efficiency of 77.7 percent can be achieved.
