---
arxiv_id: "2305.13905"
title: "EfficientSpeech: An On-Device Text to Speech Model"
authors:
  - Rowel Atienza et.al.
submitted: "2023-05-23"
categories: []
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.13905
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 4/27
citations_resolved_at: "2026-07-07T16:25:41+00:00"
references_parsed: 27
arxiv_version: ""
---

<div class="keywords">

TTS, FLOPS, parameters, RTF, CMOS

</div>

=\[draw, fill=blue!20, minimum width=2cm, minimum height=0.5cm, minimum width=2.5cm\] = \[draw=blue!50, thick, fill=blue!10, rounded corners, rectangle, inner sep=0.25cm, minimum height=3cm, \]

= \[draw=blue!50, thick, fill=blue!10, rectangle, inner sep=0.25cm, minimum height=3cm, \]

=\[draw, fill=red!20, minimum height=0.5cm, minimum width=2.5cm\] = \[draw=red!50, thick, fill=red!10, rounded corners, rectangle, inner sep=0.25cm, minimum height=3cm, \]

=\[draw, fill=green!20, minimum height=0.5cm\]

=\[draw, fill=green!20, minimum width=1.5cm, minimum height=0.5cm\] = \[draw=green!50, thick, fill=green!10, rounded corners, rectangle, inner sep=0.25cm, minimum height=3cm, \]

=\[draw, fill=yellow!20, minimum width=2cm, minimum height=0.5cm\] = \[draw=yellow!50, thick, fill=yellow!10, rounded corners, rectangle, inner sep=0.25cm, minimum height=3cm, \]

=\[draw, fill=orange!20, minimum width=2cm, minimum height=0.5cm, minimum width=2.5cm\] = \[draw=orange!50, thick, fill=orange!10, rounded corners, rectangle, inner sep=0.25cm, minimum height=3cm, \]

=\[draw, fill=gray!20, minimum width=2cm, minimum height=0.5cm, minimum width=2.5cm\]

=\[minimum size=2cm\]

<figure id="fig:model_architecture" data-latex-placement="t">
<div class="center">

</div>
<figcaption>Model architecture of <em>EfficientSpeech</em>. The phoneme encoder is made of two transformer encoder blocks fused with up sampled features resembling a U-Net. <em>EfficientSpeech</em> uses parallel acoustic features and outputs prediction. Acoustic features are merged with phoneme features and up sampled for mel-spectrogram decoding which is made of two blocks.</figcaption>
</figure>

# Introduction

Voice is one of our primary means of communication. If our devices can also speak, a new type of natural interaction with electronic gadgets and appliances is feasible. Even better, if devices can perform standalone voice synthesis without relying on cloud services, new applications and advantages will emerge. For instance, a WiFi router can tell us what went wrong when there is no Internet access. A smart camera installed in a remote area can warn intruders. These useful actions are done by the device in autonomous manner and without relying on cloud services. As added benefits of on-device voice synthesis, privacy issues are mitigated, robustness is enhanced, and high responsiveness, low-latency and availability can be guaranteed.

In terms of natural sounding voice generation, neural TTS systems such as _FastSpeech2_ , _FastPitch_ , _Tacotron2_ , _Deep Voice 3_ , _TransformerTTS_ and _Mixer-TTS_ dominate the state of the art performance in MOS scores. These neural TTS models are designed with AI accelerators such as GPUs or TPUs in mind. There is little emphasis on investigating the feasibility of achieving standalone on-device model inference. In particular, autoregressive models like _Tacotron2_, _Deep Voice 3_ and _TransformerTTS_ are inherently slow. While non-autoregressive neural TTS such as _FastSpeech2_ and _Mixer-TTS_ are fast and have competitive voice quality that is comparable to autoregressive counterparts, these models have big footprints making them unsuitable for memory-constrained edge devices.

Recent attempts to build on-device neural TTS include _On-device TTS_ , _LiteTTS_ , _PortaSpeech_ , _LightSpeech_ and _Nix-TTS_ . _On-device TTS_ is slow and resource intensive since it is a modified _Tacotron2_ for mel spectrogram generation and uses _WaveRNN_ for vocoder. Though _LiteTTS_ can generate voice from text, it is still resource intensive with 13.4M parameters. In addition, two-stage TTS models are still better in terms of both training stability and synthetic voice quality. _PortaSpeech_ uses VAE and Flow models to generate mel spectrogram. The smallest version has 6.7M parameters and is characterized by noticeable voice quality deterioration. _LightSpeech_ uses neural architecture search (NAS) to reduce the model size of _FastSpeech2_. While the resulting model is small at 1.8M parameters, the NAS process is notoriously compute intensive with a huge environmental impact. Furthermore, NAS is susceptible to overfitting. A model architecture optimized on one language dataset (e.g. English) is not guaranteed to work on another (e.g. Korean). _Nix-TTS_ applied knowledge distillation to reduce the size of _VITS_ to 5.2MB by separately training text-to-latent encoder and latent-to-waveform decoder. While there is a significant reduction in size, the decoder is single-use or encoder specific unlike general purpose vocoders such as _HiFiGAN_ that is available in a sub-1M-parameter model for edge devices. Ironically, while the above mentioned models promote on-device TTS, there was no validation done on ARM CPUs except for _Nix-TTS_ that used a compiled ONNX model. Furthermore, most of these models have no publicly available implementations. Thus, reproducibility, fair comparison and analysis are difficult to perform.

In this paper, _EfficientSpeech_, a natural sounding TTS model that is suitable for edge devices is proposed. _EfficientSpeech_ is using a shallow U-Network pyramid transformer phoneme encoder and a shallow transposed convolutional block as the mel spectrogram decoder. _EfficientSpeech_ has 266k parameters only, about 15% of the size of _LightSpeech_ or 0.8% of _FastSpeech2_. _EfficientSpeech_ consumes 90 MFLOPS only to generate 6 sec of mel spectrogram. Using the compact version of HiFiGAN , the total model parameters is 1.2M or 22% of text to speech waveform _Nix-TTS_. Using HiFiGAN as vocoder, it runs at an RTF of 1.7 for voice generation on RPi4. Without the vocoder overhead, the mel spectrogram generation is at RTF speed of 104.3. _EfficientSpeech_ achieves a competitive CMOS of -0.14 when trained on LJSpeech dataset and evaluated against _FastSpeech2_. Due to its small size, _EfficientSpeech_ can be trained on a single GPU in 12hrs.

# Model Architecture

Figure <a href="#fig:model_architecture" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:model_architecture">1</a> shows the model architecture of _EfficientSpeech_. The phoneme sequence $`\boldsymbol{x}_{phone}\in\mathbb{R}^{N\times{d}}`$ is an embedding of the input text phonemes. All convolutional layers are 1D. $`N`$ is the variable phoneme sequence length while $`d=128`$ is the embedding size.

The _Phoneme Encoder_ is made of 2 transformer blocks. Each block is made of a depth-wise separable convolution for feature merging, _Self-Attention_ between merged features and _Mix-FFN_ for non-linear feature extraction. _Mix-FFN_ is similar to a typical transformer _FFN_ except for an additional convolution layer and the use of GeLU activation between two linear layers. Layer Normalization (_LN_) is applied after _Self-Attention_ and _Mix-FFN_. Both _Self-Attention_ and _Mix-FFN_ use residual connection for fast convergence.

The first transformer block retains the sequence length while reducing the feature dimension by $`\frac{1}{4}`$. The second transformer block reduces the sequence length by half while doubling the feature dimension. Each transformer block output feature is upsampled using a linear layer and a transposed convolutional layer. An identity layer replaces the transposed convolution if the target feature shape of $`N\times{\frac{d}{4}}`$ is already in place. Both features are then fused together to form the final phoneme features. This U-Network style of architecture was inspired by _SegFormer_ for semantic segmentation in computer vision. Reducing the feature dimension and sequence length lowers the FLOPS and the number of parameters of the model.

The _Acoustic Features and Decoders_ block borrows the idea from _Variance Adaptor_ of _FastSpeech2_. It forces the network to predict the _Energy_: $`\boldsymbol{y}_e`$, _Pitch_: $`\boldsymbol{y}_p`$ and _Duration_: $`\boldsymbol{y}_d`$. The difference in our implementation is that instead of predicting the acoustic parameters in series, _EfficientSpeech_ generates them in parallel which results to a faster inference. The predicted values of, _Energy_: $`\boldsymbol{y}_e`$, _Pitch_: $`\boldsymbol{y}_p`$ and _Duration_: $`\boldsymbol{y}_d`$, are generated by 2 blocks of _Conv-LN-ReLU_ and a final linear layer (with _ReLU_ for duration to ensure positive values). The binned energy and pitch features are embedded at the last layer to produce _Energy_: $`\boldsymbol{z}_e`$ and _Pitch_: $`\boldsymbol{z}_p`$. Meanwhile, _Duration_: $`\boldsymbol{z}_d`$ is extracted before the _ReLU_ activation.

At the _Features Fuser and Up Sampler_ block, all acoustic features are reused and fused together with the phoneme features. The fused features are then up sampled to the correct mel sequence length $`M`$ using the predicted _Duration_: $`\boldsymbol{y}_{d}`$.

The last stage is the _Mel Spectrogram Decoder_. It is made of 2 blocks of a linear layer and two layers of depth-wise separable convolution. Each layer uses _Tanh_ activation followed by _LN_.

## Model Training

The dataset used for training is LJSpeech that is made of $`13,100`$ audio clips with corresponding text transcripts. $`12,588`$ samples are set aside for training while $`512`$ clips are for testing. The phoneme sequence is generated using _g2p_ , an open-source English grapheme (spelling) to phoneme (pronunciation) converter. The waveform is transformed into mel spectrogram with window and FFT lengths of $`1,024`$, hop length of $`256`$ and sampling rate of $`22,050`$. The resulting mel spectrogram has $`80`$ channels.

Montreal Force Alignment (MFA) is used to establish the target phoneme duration. Pitch and energy ground truth values are computed using STFT and WORLD vocoder respectively.

The total loss function is shown in Equation <a href="#eq:loss_function" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:loss_function">[eq:loss*function]</a>. Mel spectrogram loss function $`\mathcal{L}*{mel}`$ is *L1* with $`\alpha=10`$. $`MSE`$ is used for *Pitch*: $`\mathcal{L}_{p}`$, *Energy*: $`\mathcal{L}_{e}`$, and *Duration*: $`\mathcal{L}\_{d}`$ loss functions. $`\beta=2`$, $`\gamma=2`$ and $`\lambda=1`$.

```math
\begin{align}
\label{eq:loss_function}
\mathcal{L} = \alpha\mathcal{L}_{mel} + \beta\mathcal{L}_{p} + \gamma\mathcal{L}_{e} + \lambda\mathcal{L}_{d}.
\end{align}
```

The _EfficientSpeech_ model is trained for $`5,000`$ epochs. Batch size is $`128`$. The optimizer is AdamW with learning rate of $`0.001`$, cosine learning rate decay and warm up of $`50`$ epochs.

<div id="tab:params">

|                        |                   |               |
| :--------------------- | ----------------: | ------------: |
|                        |     \# Parameters |   ES Relative |
| Model                  | (M)$`\downarrow`$ | \# Parameters |
| _EfficientSpeech_ (ES) | $`\textbf{0.27}`$ |         $`-`$ |
| _FastSpeech2_          |         $`30.81`$ |    $`0.86\%`$ |
| _Tacotron2_            |         $`23.81`$ |    $`1.12\%`$ |
| _MixerTTS_             |         $`20.06`$ |    $`1.33\%`$ |
| _LightSpeech_          |          $`1.80`$ |   $`14.78\%`$ |

The number of parameters in different mel spectrogram generator models. _LightSpeech_ is based on published data.

</div>

<div id="tab:flops">

|                        |                       |             |
| :--------------------- | --------------------: | ----------: |
|                        |                       | ES Relative |
| Model                  | GFLOPS $`\downarrow`$ |      GFLOPS |
| _EfficientSpeech_ (ES) |     $`\textbf{0.09}`$ |       $`-`$ |
| _FastSpeech2_          |             $`15.87`$ |  $`0.57\%`$ |
| _Tacotron2_            |             $`16.20`$ |  $`0.56\%`$ |
| _MixerTTS_             |             $`10.29`$ |  $`0.87\%`$ |
| _LightSpeech_          |              $`0.76`$ | $`11.84\%`$ |

Amount of computations in terms of GFLOPS in different mel spectrogram generator models. Average voice length is 6 sec. _LightSpeech_ is based on published data for 9 sec of speech.

</div>

<div class="table*">

|                        |                    |                 |                        |                 |                       |                 |
| :--------------------- | -----------------: | --------------: | ---------------------: | --------------: | --------------------: | --------------: |
|                        |               mRTF |     ES Relative |                   mRTF |     ES Relative |                  mRTF |     ES Relative |
| Model                  |  V100 $`\uparrow`$ |        Speed-up | Xeon 2.2G $`\uparrow`$ |        Speed-up | ARM 1.5G $`\uparrow`$ |        Speed-up |
| _EfficientSpeech_ (ES) | $`\textbf{953.3}`$ |           $`-`$ |     $`\textbf{470.2}`$ |           $`-`$ |    $`\textbf{104.3}`$ |           $`-`$ |
| _FastSpeech2_          |          $`371.3`$ |   $`2.6\times`$ |               $`64.7`$ |   $`7.3\times`$ |               $`5.2`$ |  $`20.1\times`$ |
| _Tacotron2_            |            $`8.3`$ | $`114.7\times`$ |                $`1.2`$ | $`379.4\times`$ |               $`0.2`$ | $`462.2\times`$ |
| _MixerTTS_             |          $`204.9`$ |   $`4.7\times`$ |               $`55.2`$ |   $`8.5\times`$ |               $`2.9`$ |  $`36.5\times`$ |
| _LightSpeech_          |              $`-`$ |           $`-`$ |              $`107.5`$ |   $`4.4\times`$ |                 $`-`$ |           $`-`$ |

</div>

<div class="table*">

|                        |                    |                |                        |                |                       |                |
| :--------------------- | -----------------: | -------------: | ---------------------: | -------------: | --------------------: | -------------: |
|                        |                RTF |    ES Relative |                    RTF |    ES Relative |                   RTF |    ES Relative |
| Model                  |  V100 $`\uparrow`$ |       Speed-up | Xeon 2.2G $`\uparrow`$ |       Speed-up | ARM 1.5G $`\uparrow`$ |       Speed-up |
| _EfficientSpeech_ (ES) | $`\textbf{363.0}`$ |          $`-`$ |      $`\textbf{24.1}`$ |          $`-`$ |      $`\textbf{1.7}`$ |          $`-`$ |
| _FastSpeech2_          |           $`66.9`$ |  $`5.4\times`$ |               $`11.9`$ |  $`2.0\times`$ |               $`1.3`$ |  $`1.3\times`$ |
| _Tacotron2_            |            $`7.7`$ | $`47.3\times`$ |                $`1.0`$ | $`24.9\times`$ |               $`0.1`$ | $`12.4\times`$ |
| _MixerTTS_             |           $`56.6`$ |  $`6.4\times`$ |                $`6.4`$ |  $`3.8\times`$ |               $`0.2`$ |  $`6.9\times`$ |

</div>

<div id="tab:mos">

| Model             | CMOS$`\uparrow`$ |
| :---------------- | ---------------: |
| _FastSpeech2_     |          $`0.0`$ |
| _EfficientSpeech_ |        $`-0.14`$ |
| _LightSpeech_     |         $`0.04`$ |

The CMOS between _FastSpeech2_ and _EfficientSpeech_. For reference, we include the published results of _LightSpeech_.

</div>

# Experimental Results

The _EfficientSpeech_ evaluation is not only in terms of the generated speech quality but also its trade off with respect to the number of parameters, amount of computations as measured by floating point operations (FLOPS), and speed or throughput in terms of latency. A comprehensive benchmark enables us to get the overall picture of our model performance as a function of memory, computational budget and time instead of focusing only on selected favorable metrics.

The number of parameters is commonly used as a proxy to the amount of memory needed by the model during execution. FLOPS reflects the number of Fused-Multiply-Add (FMA) operations needed to complete an inference. For variable input text sequence length like in TTS, FLOPS is measured using 128 randomly sampled text inputs from the test split. FLOPS increases with input text length. Latency is measured in terms of the number of seconds of voice generated per second or the real-time-factor (RTF). The inverse of this RTF, the time needed to generate 1 sec of voice, can also be used but it leads to small fractional numbers that are less intuitive to interpret. To focus on the speed of _EfficientSpeech_, mel spectrogram real-time-factor (mRTF) is introduced. mRTF is the number of seconds of speech divided by the mel generation time.

`fvcore` is used to compute the number of parameters and FLOPS. Time measurements use the CPU wall clock. Table <a href="#tab:params" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:params">1</a> shows the number of parameters and the relative footprint of _EfficientSpeech_ in comparison with state-of-the-art mel spectrogram generators. _EfficientSpeech_ is tiny at 266k parameters leading to a very small number of FLOPS as shown in Table <a href="#tab:flops" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:flops">2</a>. The effect of the small number of parameters and FLOPS is a fast mel spectrogram generation reaching mRTF of 953.3 on a V100 GPU as shown in Table <a href="#tab:mel-rtf" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:mel-rtf">[tab:mel-rtf]</a>. The speed is more evident on an RPi4 ARM CPU where _EfficientSpeech_ reaches mRTF of 104.3 which is $`20.1\times`$ faster compared to _FastSpeech2_.

For _Tacotron2_ and _MixerTTS_, the pre-trained versions provided by NVIDIA NeMo with HiFiGANv1 was evaluated. For speech generation, both models are unable to run with RTF $`\ge`$ 1.0 on the ARM CPU of RPi4. Furthermore, NeMo employed mixed precision training and other optimizations providing a significant acceleration in GPUs.

Table <a href="#tab:mos" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:mos">3</a> shows the CMOS as evaluated by 15 participants with high English listening comprehension. The synthesized speech waveforms are from the test split. Both _EfficientSpeech_ and _FastSpeech2_ used the small version of off-the-shelf HiFiGANv2 with 0.9M parameters. In terms of audio quality, _EfficientSpeech_ outputs only suffer a slight degradation in quality in spite of its small size. For reference, the published CMOS score of _LightSpeech_ as compared to _FastSpeech2_ is also shown. However, note that the samples used to obtain this score are not available.

# Discussion

The RTF slow down from Table <a href="#tab:mel-rtf" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:mel-rtf">[tab:mel-rtf]</a> to <a href="#tab:wav-rtf" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:wav-rtf">[tab:wav-rtf]</a>, can be attributed to the inefficient vocoder. At mRTF of 104.3 on RPi4, _EfficientSpeech_ has a significant headroom to speed up the voice generation given a counter part lightweight vocoder. In the experimental setup, the HiFiGAN consumes 5.0 GFLOPS while the _EfficientSpeech_ model overhead is only 0.09 GFLOPS. Meanwhile, majority of SOTA mel generator models have used up most of RPi4 Model B 13.5 to 32 GFLOPS (estimates vary).

The computational performance of low-cost BCM2835 SoC ARMv6 256MB to 512MB RAM used in RPi Zero, A and B is about 0.2 to 0.3 GFLOPS giving _EfficientSpeech_ enough leeway but not for the vocoder. RPi3 Model B BCM2837/B0 SoC ARMv7/8 1GB RAM has a computing performance of about 3.6 to 6.2 GFLOPS. RPi2 Model B BCM2836 and BCM2837 SoCs ARMv7 1GB RAM has about 1.5 to 4.4 GFLOPS. Theoretically, a sub 0.1 GFLOPS vocoder will enable wide adoption of neural TTS such as _EfficientSpeech_ on many low-cost and low-power devices. A sub 1 GFLOPS vocoder can already broaden the device coverage of neural TTS to RPi2. At 266k parameters, 16-bit floating point, the footprint of _EfficientSpeech_ is about 532kb leaving enough RAM space to store results of intermediate layers even on low memory 256MB SoCs.

Note that although the number of model parameters and FLOPS have impact on RTF, there are other factors that may contribute to latency. For instance, a model architecture that has dense skip connections has inherent delays in the forward propagation due to buffering. Models with many layers are slow due to the increasing forward propagation steps. Feature dimensions mismatch, normalization layers and complex activation functions can also cause slow model inference.

# Conclusion

The quality voice synthesis improves as the model size increases. _EfficientSpeech_ code and pre-trained weights are available on GitHub for: Tiny (266k), Small (952k) and Base (4M). See: <https://github.com/roatienza/efficientspeech>

# Acknowledgement

Project funding by Rowel Atienza through Sibyl.AI. Conference attendance funding by ERDT-FRDG.

## References

1. Y~Ren, C~Hu, X~Tan, T~Qin, S~Zhao, Z~Zhao, and TY~Liu,
   \newblock ``Fastspeech 2: Fast and high-quality end-to-end text to speech,''
   \newblock in {\em ICLR}, 2021.
2. A~{\L}a{\'n}cucki,
   \newblock ``Fastpitch: Parallel text-to-speech with pitch prediction,''
   \newblock in {\em ICASSP 2021}. IEEE, 2021, pp. 6588--6592.
3. J~Shen, R~Pang, R~Weiss, M~Schuster, N~Jaitly, Z~Yang, Z~Chen, Y~Zhang, Y~Wang,
   R~Skerrv-Ryan, et~al.,
   \newblock ``Natural tts synthesis by conditioning wavenet on mel spectrogram
   predictions,''
   \newblock in {\em ICASSP}. IEEE, 2018, pp. 4779--4783.
4. W~Ping, K~Peng, A~Gibiansky, S~{\"O} Arik, A~Kannan, S~Narang, J~Raiman, and
   J~Miller,
   \newblock ``Deep voice 3: Scaling text-to-speech with convolutional sequence
   learning.,''
   \newblock in {\em ICLR}, 2018.
5. N~Li, S~Liu, Y~Liu, S~Zhao, and M~Liu,
   \newblock ``Neural speech synthesis with transformer network,''
   \newblock in {\em AAAI}, 2019, vol.~33, pp. 6706--6713.
6. O~Tatanov, S~Beliaev, and B~Ginsburg,
   \newblock ``Mixer-tts: non-autoregressive, fast and compact text-to-speech
   model conditioned on language model embeddings,''
   \newblock in {\em ICASSP 2022}. IEEE, 2022, pp. 7482--7486.
7. S~Achanta, A~Antony, L~Golipour, J~Li, T~Raitio, R~Rasipuram, F~Rossi, J~Shi,
   J~Upadhyay, D~Winarsky, et~al.,
   \newblock ``On-device neural speech synthesis,''
   \newblock in {\em 2021 IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding
   Workshop (ASRU)}. IEEE, 2021, pp. 1155--1161.
8. HK~Nguyen, K~Jeong, SY~Um, MJ~Hwang, E~Song, and HG~Kang,
   \newblock ``Litetts: A lightweight mel-spectrogram-free text-to-wave
   synthesizer based on generative adversarial networks.,''
   \newblock in {\em Interspeech}, 2021, pp. 3595--3599.
9. Y~Ren, J~Liu, and Z~Zhao,
   \newblock ``Portaspeech: Portable and high-quality generative text-to-speech,''
   \newblock {\em NeuRIPS}, vol. 34, pp. 13963--13974, 2021.
10. R~Luo, X~Tan, R~Wang, T~Qin, J~Li, S~Zhao, E~Chen, and TY~Liu,
    \newblock ``Lightspeech: Lightweight and fast text to speech with neural
    architecture search,''
    \newblock in {\em ICASSP}. IEEE, 2021, pp. 5699--5703.
11. R~Chevi and A~Prasojo, R~Aji,
    \newblock ``Nix-tts: An incredibly lightweight end-to-end text-to-speech model
    via non end-to-end distillation,''
    \newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15643}, 2022. [arXiv:2203.15643](../2022/2203.15643.md)
12. J~Kim, J~Kong, and J~Son,
    \newblock ``Conditional variational autoencoder with adversarial learning for
    end-to-end text-to-speech,''
    \newblock in {\em ICML}. PMLR, 2021, pp. 5530--5540.
13. J~Kong, J~Kim, and J~Bae,
    \newblock ``Hifi-gan: Generative adversarial networks for efficient and high
    fidelity speech synthesis,''
    \newblock {\em NeuRIPS}, vol. 33, pp. 17022--17033, 2020.
14. O~Ronneberger, P~Fischer, and T~Brox,
    \newblock ``U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation,''
    \newblock in {\em International Conference on Medical image computing and
    computer-assisted intervention}. Springer, 2015, pp. 234--241.
15. K~Ito and L~Johnson,
    \newblock ``The lj speech dataset,''
    \url{https://keithito.com/LJ-Speech-Dataset/}, 2017.
16. A~Vaswani, N~Shazeer, N~Parmar, J~Uszkoreit, L~Jones, A~N Gomez, {\L}~Kaiser,
    and I~Polosukhin,
    \newblock ``Attention is all you need,''
    \newblock {\em NeuRIPS}, vol. 30, 2017.
17. D~Hendrycks and K~Gimpel,
    \newblock ``Gaussian error linear units (gelus),''
    \newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.08415}, 2016. [arXiv:1606.08415](https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.08415)
18. J~Lei Ba, J~Kiros, and G~Hinton,
    \newblock ``Layer normalization,''
    \newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.06450}, 2016. [arXiv:1607.06450](https://arxiv.org/abs/1607.06450)
19. E~Xie, W~Wang, Z~Yu, A~Anandkumar, J~M Alvarez, and P~Luo,
    \newblock ``Segformer: Simple and efficient design for semantic segmentation
    with transformers,''
    \newblock {\em NeuRIPS}, vol. 34, pp. 12077--12090, 2021.
20. K~Park and J~Kim,
    \newblock ``g2pe,'' \url{https://github.com/Kyubyong/g2p}, 2019.
21. M~McAuliffe, M~Socolof, S~Mihuc, M~Wagner, and M~Sonderegger,
    \newblock ``Montreal forced aligner: Trainable text-speech alignment using
    kaldi.,''
    \newblock in {\em Interspeech}, 2017, vol. 2017, pp. 498--502.
22. M~Morise, H~Kawahara, and H~Katayose,
    \newblock ``Fast and reliable f0 estimation method based on the period
    extraction of vocal fold vibration of singing voice and speech,''
    \newblock in {\em Intl Conf: Audio for Games}. Audio Engineering Society, 2009.
23. I~Loshchilov and F~Hutter,
    \newblock ``Decoupled weight decay regularization,''
    \newblock in {\em ICLR}, 2018.
24. M~Dehghani, Y~Tay, A~Arnab, L~Beyer, and A~Vaswani,
    \newblock ``The efficiency misnomer,''
    \newblock in {\em ICLR}, 2021.
25. Facebook Research,
    \newblock ``fvcore,'' \url{https://github.com/facebookresearch/fvcore}, 2022.
26. O~Kuchaiev, J~Li, H~Nguyen, O~Hrinchuk, R~Leary, B~Ginsburg, S~Kriman,
    S~Beliaev, V~Lavrukhin, J~Cook, et~al.,
    \newblock ``Nemo: a toolkit for building ai applications using neural
    modules,''
    \newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.09577}, 2019. [arXiv:1909.09577](https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.09577)
27. P~Loizou,
    \newblock ``Speech quality assessment,''
    \newblock in {\em Multimedia analysis, processing and communications}, pp.
    623--654. Springer, 2011.
