---
arxiv_id: "2311.09022"
title: Exploring the Potential of Large Language Models in Computational Argumentation
authors:
  - Guizhen Chen
  - Liying Cheng
  - Luu Anh Tuan
  - Lidong Bing
submitted: "2023-11-15"
categories:
  - cs.CL
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.09022
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 8/101
citations_resolved_at: "2026-07-07T16:19:56+00:00"
references_parsed: 101
arxiv_version: ""
---

# Introduction

Argumentation is a powerful and indispensable tool in various domains such as legality , debating , and education . It plays a vital role in facilitating understanding between individuals by providing insights into different perspectives and their underlying reasons. Additionally, argumentation serves as a means of communicating convincing opinions, enhancing the acceptability of positions among readers. As computational argumentation becomes a growing research field in natural language processing (NLP) , researchers have dedicated considerable efforts to two distinct directions . The first direction, argument mining, focuses on understanding unstructured texts and automatically extracting various argumentative elements . The other direction is argument generation, which aims to generate argumentative texts based on external knowledge or summarize key argument points. .

Unlike classical structure prediction NLP tasks like named entity recognition that typically take a single sentence as the input and extract token-level information, computational argumentation tasks require discourse-level comprehension. This requirement makes it challenging and laborious to gather a large volume of labeled data for training, hindering the progress of research in this field. Fortunately, recent studies have shown that large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive performance on a wide variety of NLP tasks in both zero-shot and few-shot settings. Given their strong capability in understanding long contexts and generating natural language, it is exciting yet still questionable how well LLMs can perform computational argumentation tasks without any supervised training.

In light of this, our objective is to investigate the performance of LLMs on diverse computational argumentation tasks. There are two main issues we aim to address in our study. Firstly, although there are existing surveys about argument mining , the systematic study of the broader definition of computational argumentation including argument mining and argument generation is under-explored. To bridge this gap, we categorize current computational argumentation tasks into two primary classes, comprising six distinct categories. In addition, we establish a standardized format and evaluation metrics for fourteen openly available datasets. Secondly, existing tasks and datasets either focus on argument mining or argument generation. To take a holistic approach, we propose a new task that integrates both argument mining and generation. This task is designed to generate counter speeches in response to debate speeches, which typically advocate a particular stance. We name them counter speech and supporting speech respectively in the remainder of our paper. This task requires the model to understand the argumentative structures in the supporting speech, meanwhile to generate the counter speech against the proposition. To facilitate the study, we construct a new document-to-document counterargument generation benchmark based on a debate database .

To evaluate the performance of LLMs on computational argumentation tasks, we choose from both open-source and proprietary LLMs to conduct our main experiments, in zero-shot and few-shot settings. Our results reveal that LLMs exhibit promising performance in both argument mining and argument generation tasks. While LLMs might fail to achieve exceptionally high scores on specific metrics such as R<span class="smallcaps">ouge</span>, we hypothesize that the strict nature of these metrics could potentially underestimate the true potential of LLMs, which are inherently generative in nature. Human evaluation shows that LLMs are able to comprehend the core meaning of arguments and convey them effectively, even if the exact wording might not match. Collectively, these findings highlight the strengths of LLMs in grasping and effectively conveying the essence of arguments, showcasing their potential beyond what traditional metrics may suggest.

To summarize, our contributions include:

<div class="list">

$`\bullet`$

We organize the existing computational argumentation tasks including argument mining and argument generation, and standardize the format of related datasets.

We introduce a new task targeted at evaluating both argument mining and argument generation capabilities as a whole.

To the best of our knowledge, we for the first time systematically evaluate the performance of multiple computational argumentation tasks using LLMs in zero-shot and few-shot settings.

Extensive experimental results and analysis demonstrate the potential of LLMs in the computational argumentation research field and also suggest limitations in existing evaluation.

</div>

# Background

#### Computational Argumentation

Argumentation research has a long history , aiming to persuade through logical propositions and achieve agreement among parties . Recently, computational argumentation has emerged as a significant field in NLP. The two main research directions are argument mining and argument generation, along with other directions such as persuasiveness of arguments and quality assessment of arguments . Our work specifically focuses on argument mining and argument generation, where the detailed background can be found in Appendix <a href="#sec:appen_background" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:appen_background">7</a>.

#### Large Language Models

Recently, LLMs such as ChatGPT have demonstrated strong capabilities in various NLP tasks. A surge of research has emerged to analyze and evaluate their performance on different types of tasks , including translation , reasoning , question answering , sentiment analysis , text-to-SQL , dialogue understanding , relation extraction , hate speech detection , summarization , and trustworthiness etc. However, it still lacks a systematic and thorough evaluation of computational argumentation using LLMs. Therefore, our work aims to explore the field of computational argumentation using LLMs by covering multiple tasks.

# Tasks and Datasets

<figure id="fig:tasks" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figs/task-new.pdf" />
<figcaption> Explored tasks and datasets in this work. </figcaption>
</figure>

In this work, we systematically review existing tasks and datasets of computational argumentation and organize them in Figure <a href="#fig:tasks" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:tasks">1</a>. To maintain a balance for different tasks and datasets, we restrict our assessment by randomly sampling 500 examples from each dataset.

## Argument Mining

We focus on the detection of argumentative components and their relations, which are the fundamental tasks in argument mining. We include a range of datasets with varying levels of difficulty, from simple binary tasks such as claim detection and evidence detection to harder ones like evidence type classification and stance detection. While we do not cover joint tasks such as end-to-end argument mining , these tasks could be transformed into a sequence of subtasks of identifying argumentative components and relations, which could be handled by our evaluated tasks.

#### Claim Detection

A claim is a statement or proposition that asserts something to be true or false. In the context of argument mining, a claim is a key argument component that forms the basis of reasoning and debate. In claim detection tasks, the goal is to automatically extract claims from articles related to a specific debating topic . We evaluate on datasets including IAM Claims , IBM Claims , and IBM Argument .

#### Evidence Detection

Evidence is any information or data that supports or undermines a claim. In argument mining, evidence extraction involves automatically identifying and extracting relevant evidence from texts to substantiate claims . Automating this process aids in comprehending and assessing arguments. By pinpointing relevant evidence, researchers can gain valuable insights into the underlying beliefs and motivations behind an argument. We evaluate evidence detection on the IBM Evidence dataset and the IAM Evidence dataset .

#### Stance Detection

Stance represents a position towards a controversial topic, usually in the form of support and attack. Stance detection aims to determine whether a text supports, opposes, or remains neutral toward the topic. This task holds significance in domains such as politics , fact-checking , and journalism , as it helps gauge public opinion and attitudes. Automated stance detection enhances the understanding and analysis of arguments across various applications. We use multiple datasets for evaluation, including FEVER , IAM Stance , IBM Stance , and Multi-Target Stance Detection (MTSD) .

#### Evidence Type Classification

Evidence type refers to the different categories of evidence that can be used to support or undermine a claim . Examples of evidence types from previous works include statistics, expert opinions, facts, anecdotes, examples, etc. Automatic evidence type classification aids in understanding the strengths and weaknesses of an argument, particularly in fields such as debate, law, and policy. We use two datasets for evaluation, including IBM Type and AQE Type .

## Argument Generation

We cover two main tasks: argument generation and argument summarization.

#### Generation

Argument generation involves automatically generating arguments for or against a particular topic, to create persuasive and coherent arguments that can support or challenge a given position. We adopt the CounterArguGen dataset for evaluation. There are two settings: generating a counter-argument given a claim with premises or generating based on a claim with weak premises.

#### Summarization

The goal of argument summarization is to extract the main ideas and evidence supporting or challenging a particular claim or position and present them concisely and coherently. We evaluate two datasets: ConcluGen and DebateSum , which aim to summarize or give a conclusion for arguments. In the ConcluGen dataset, the corpus is augmented with three types of argumentative knowledge: topic, targets, and aspects. We study the effect of each argumentative knowledge and compare their respective performance with the base setting. In the DebateSum dataset, there are two settings. The abstractive summary generates a concise summary of the main points and arguments, while the extractive summary aims to extract relevant evidence from the passage to support the arguments.

## Counter Speech Generation

Existing tasks in the field primarily center around either argument mining or argument generation. The former emphasizes language understanding, whereas the latter focuses on language generation. However, there is a lack of research comprehensively studying the overall argumentative capabilities of models. We contend that argument understanding and argument generation are two indispensable components of the broader computational argumentation landscape. Hence, a holistic perspective is necessary for evaluating the argumentative capabilities of models. Focusing solely on argument mining or argument generation provides only a partial understanding of their true potential.

In light of this, we propose a new task, counter speech generation, that aims to provide a more thorough evaluation of LLMs’ argumentative capabilities. This task serves as a means to assess the model’s capability to comprehend argumentative structures and generate counter-arguments accordingly. In debates, a supporting speech serves as a form of discourse intended to construct a specific idea or stance. It aims to provide compelling arguments and evidence in favor of a particular viewpoint. Counter speech generation, therefore, involves the task of generating a responsive or opposing speech in reaction to the supporting speech.

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first document-to-document counterargument generation task that simultaneously assesses a model from multiple perspectives including claim detection, stance detection, and argument generation. Earlier works focus on mining and retrieval of counterarguments , which does not involve argument generation. Some focus on generating an opposing argument for a given statement which are typically short, informal texts from online forums . In contrast, ours consists of complete, formal speeches that are in the form of long argumentative texts, which potentially contain multiple arguments. Our task requires the model to first mine and analyze the main arguments in the original speech, then construct a complete and cohesive speech that addresses each key point. This expanded scope challenges the model to have a deeper understanding of argumentative structures from longer passages, while also requiring a heightened capacity to generate complete counter speeches.

To facilitate this study, we process a debate dataset by matching each supporting speech with the corresponding counter speech in a pool of debate scripts. We randomly sample 250 speech pairs for our zero-shot experiments. Given the constraint on limited annotated samples, we evaluate in a zero-shot setting only. Appendix <a href="#sec:sample" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:sample">8</a> shows a data sample of this dataset.

# Experiments

In this section, we discuss our choices of models, methods, and evaluation metrics.

## Models

In our investigation, we examine the effectiveness of LLMs in directly performing inference on argument-related tasks without any fine-tuning. To accomplish this, we evaluate on open-source and proprietary models, including ChatGPT (`GPT-3.5-Turbo`) from OpenAI , `Flan-T5-XL`, `Flan-T5-XXL` and `Flan-UL2` from the Flan model family, as well as `Llama-2-7B`, `Llama-2-13B` from the LLaMA2 series .

## Methods

For tasks of a similar nature, we employ a consistent prompt format. More specifically, for argument mining tasks, we adhere to a standardized prompt template which consists of task definition and required output format. The task definition serves as a clear guideline for the LLMs to understand the task objective, while the required output format provides clarity on the expected output structure and restricts the generated response to a set of predefined labels to facilitate easier evaluation.

In contrast to argument mining tasks, output for argument generation tasks is more free-style and not constrained by any predetermined label space. The focus is on generating contextually relevant arguments. In order to tap into LLMs’ linguistic knowledge and reasoning abilities, we adopt the prompts advised by ChatGPT. The prompt templates are available in Appendix <a href="#sec:prompts" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:prompts">9</a>.

<figure id="fig:flow" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figs/end-to-end-2.pdf" />
<figcaption> Three different approaches for our proposed task on counter speech generation. </figcaption>
</figure>

<div class="table*">

</div>

To tackle counter speech generation, we propose three different approaches[^4], as shown in Figure <a href="#fig:flow" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:flow">2</a>. The first approach follows a pipeline method. We first identify the main claims from the supporting speech by determining if each sentence is a claim towards the given topic. We use `Flan-T5-XXL` due to its fast computation and strong capability in claim detection. After identifying all claims, we generate counterarguments that attack each claim detected in the supporting speech. For this step, `GPT-3.5-Turbo` is employed due to its strong generative ability.

Another pipeline approach is by generating a summary of the supporting speech. Initially, the key arguments in the supporting speech are summarized into a condensed representation of the main points. Subsequently, a counter speech is crafted to challenge these key arguments. In both steps, we use `GPT-3.5-Turbo`, which is adept at handling long inputs and comprehending long contexts.

Unlike the two-step approaches, the third method is a one-step process where we directly prompt `GPT-3.5-Turbo` to respond to the supporting speech by challenging the main arguments. This approach serves as a means of gauging the model’s ability to internally identify key arguments and generate a respective counter speech.

## Evaluation

To evaluate argument mining tasks, we use both accuracy and F1 score as the metrics.

To assess argument generation and counter speech generation, we employ a wide range of automatic evaluation metrics, including R<span class="smallcaps">ouge</span>-1, R<span class="smallcaps">ouge</span>-2, R<span class="smallcaps">ouge</span>-L , METEOR and BERTScore . The R<span class="smallcaps">ouge</span> scores assess the quality based on the overlap with the reference arguments, while METEOR also considers synonyms, paraphrases, and stemming. On the other hand, BERTScore takes into account the semantic context. We also conduct human evaluation to complement the results from automatic evaluation.

## Previous SOTA

To compare our results against existing state-of-the-art (SOTA), we either finetune pre-trained language models (PLMs) or leverage available checkpoints to conduct inference on our sampled test set. Training details are reported in Appendix <a href="#sec:training" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:training">10</a>.

<figure id="fig: task_difficulty" data-latex-placement="t!">
<figure id="fig:few_shot_simple">

</figure>
<p>             </p>
<figure id="fig:few_shot_hard">

</figure>
<p>        </p>
<figure id="fig:few_shot_all">

</figure>
<figcaption>Few-shot performance comparison on argument mining tasks. Results of the previous SOTA (using full setting and 500 samples) are also shown for easy comparison. *: Note that we exclude <em>IBM Argument</em> because the train set is smaller than 500.</figcaption>
</figure>

# Results and Discussion

In this section, we discuss the main results and provide insights into the performance of various LLMs on argument mining, argument generation, and counter speech generation.

## Results on Argument Mining

Table <a href="#tab:zero-shot-AM" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:zero-shot-AM">[tab:zero-shot-AM]</a> shows the zero-shot performance of three representative models, `GPT-3.5-Turbo`, `Flan-UL2` and `Llama-2-13B`, across 11 argument mining datasets. Statistical tests[^5] are conducted to show if the LLM’s predictions are significantly different from the random observations. Results of other models including `Flan-T5-XL`, `Flan-T5-XXL` and `Llama-2-7B` are available in Appendix <a href="#sec:appen_am_few" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:appen_am_few">11</a>.

To analyze, we categorize tasks into <u>simple</u> and <u>hard</u> tasks based on the number of classes involved. Binary classification tasks, including claim detection, evidence detection, IAM stance detection, and IBM stance detection, are classified as <u>simple</u> tasks. Tasks with more than two labels, including evidence classification, FEVER stance detection, and MTSD stance detection, are classified as <u>hard</u> tasks.

Overall, both `GPT-3.5-Turbo` and `Flan-UL2` perform decently in the zero-shot setting, surpassing the random baseline with most results being statistically different. However, `Llama-2-13B` falls short of the random baseline in the majority of the tasks, notably in more challenging tasks like FEVER stance detection and evidence classification. This highlights its limitations in capturing nuanced stances and comprehending evidence types within the zero-shot context, which relies on sufficient prior knowledge in the model.

Comparing `GPT-3.5-Turbo` and `Flan-UL2`, `Flan-UL2` consistently demonstrates higher proficiency in tasks like claim detection, evidence detection, and certain stance detection tasks that are mostly binary classification tasks. However, its performance diminishes when encountered with tasks that involve more than two classes, such as MTSD stance detection and AQE evidence classification. In contrast, `GPT-3.5-Turbo` generally demonstrates superior performance in these multi-class scenarios.

<div class="table*">

</div>

Figure <a href="#fig: task_difficulty" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig: task_difficulty">6</a> shows the effects of increasing shots on different models and task difficulties. In general, while there remain certain gaps between the few-shot performance of LLMs and finetuned PLMs using the full training set, it is worth noting a significant trend: by simply prompting LLMs with less than 10 demonstrations, they are able to close the gaps and match the performance of finetuned PLMs trained with 500 samples.

Comparing among models, we notice that the choice of model is crucial, as different models exhibit varying levels of proficiency across different tasks. While Flan models excel in simple tasks, the performances of `Flan-T5-XL` and `Flan-UL2` lag behind that of `GPT-3.5-Turbo` in hard tasks, even with an increased number of shots. Overall, `Flan-T5-XXL` appears to be most robust, consistently demonstrating strong performance across diverse tasks.

Secondly, larger models are not necessarily superior to smaller models. Upon comparing the two LLaMA models, `Llama-2-13B` generally outperforms `Llama-2-7B`. However, one interesting exception surfaces when the input is minimal. Surprisingly, `Llama-2-7B` proves to be more effective than `Llama-2-13B` in simple tasks. For Flan models, larger models consistently outperform their smaller counterparts in simple tasks. This trend, however, does not hold in the case of more challenging tasks. Notably, `Flan-T5-XL` (3B) model performs comparably to `Flan-UL2` (20B) in hard tasks, despite its significantly smaller size. Furthermore, the 11B `Flan-T5-XXL` model showcases strong performance, even though it is smaller than both `Flan-UL2` and `Llama-2-13B`. This suggests that, for certain complex tasks, the performance of the model may not be solely determined by its size.

Furthermore, increasing demonstrations have varying effects on different models. `GPT-3.5-Turbo` generally benefits from more shots. For Flan models, the gain in performance is not obvious. Llama models, on the other hand, exhibit mixed performance in response to more demonstrations. The larger model demonstrates notable performance improvement, particularly in hard tasks, when provided with more shots. However, the smaller model does not exhibit performance gain from additional demonstrations. In fact, when it comes to simple tasks, providing more shots has a negative impact. It appears that longer contexts might introduce noise or unnecessary information that could potentially hinder the performance of smaller models.

## Results on Argument Generation

Table <a href="#tab:few-shot-AG" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:few-shot-AG">[tab:few-shot-AG]</a> presents the performance of `GPT-3.5-Turbo` on argument generation tasks. Compared to existing SOTA, `GPT-3.5-Turbo` already outperforms previous methods in several tasks including CounterArguGen, ConcluGen in the base setting, as well as abstractive summarization in DebateSum.

Although previous methods excel in other ConcluGen settings, we attribute their high performance to additional annotations encoding specific aspects, targets, or topics. Such manual annotations are task-specific and extremely costly. `GPT-3.5-Turbo`, on the other hand, achieves comparable results across different settings regardless of the presence of encoded information. Furthermore, the contrasting results from different evaluation metrics reveal an interesting pattern: the R<span class="smallcaps">ouge</span> scores are generally low but the BERTScores are high. The low R<span class="smallcaps">ouge</span> scores indicate that there are only a few overlaps between the generated text and the reference text. The high BERTScore indicates that the semantic meaning of the generated text is highly similar to the reference text. This suggests that although the generated text may not match the reference text in terms of exact wording or specific phrases, it successfully captures the underlying semantic meaning. To further support this, we provide several illustrative examples in Appendix <a href="#sec:appen_examples" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:appen_examples">12</a>. Both automatic evaluation and quality analysis show that `GPT-3.5-Turbo` grasps the essence of the content and conveys it effectively, even if the choice of words or phrasing differs from the reference.

For extractive summarization, the previous method relies on word-level classification, wherein each word is predicted as either “underlined” or “not-underlined”, which is inefficient and compromises the coherence of the generated sentences. In contrast, `GPT-3.5-Turbo` avoids the high training cost and generates coherent sentences. Additionally, our quality analysis shows that `GPT-3.5-Turbo` can identify important information accurately. Case studies can be found in Appendix <a href="#sec:appen_ext_summ" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:appen_ext_summ">13</a>.

In addition, we notice that `GPT-3.5-Turbo` exhibits incremental performance improvements as the number of shots increases. The performance gains are relatively modest compared to those observed in argument mining tasks. This implies that `GPT-3.5-Turbo` is inherently proficient in argument generation without necessitating more demonstrations.

We also evaluate other models including `Llama-2-7B`, `Llama-2-13B`, and `Flan-UL2` which could accommodate long context. Performance of other models are available in Appendix <a href="#sec:AG" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:AG">14</a>. All models exhibit similar trends with the above except `Flan-UL2` - its advantage in extractive summarization is less apparent compared to the other models.

## Results on Counter Speech Generation

#### Automatic Evaluation

Table <a href="#tab:benchmark_res" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:benchmark_res">[tab:benchmark_res]</a> shows the results from automatic evaluation. The end-to-end approach surpasses the summarization pipeline approach across all metrics. This highlights the model’s strong capability of internalizing and synthesizing information from the supporting speech without the need for intermediate steps.

Comparing the end-to-end approach to the claim detection pipeline approach, the former lags behind in R<span class="smallcaps">ouge</span>-1 and METEOR, but surpasses in BERTScore, R<span class="smallcaps">ouge</span>-2, and R<span class="smallcaps">ouge</span>-L. To determine which approach is superior, we conduct human evaluation for a more complete understanding of the performance of these two approaches.

#### Human Evaluation

We hired 2 human judges who are professional English speakers to manually evaluate the quality of counter speeches generated by the claim pipeline approach and the end-to-end approach on 50 random samples. For each test instance, we provide the judges with supporting speeches along with randomly ordered counter speeches from the two methods, and ask the judges to individually evaluate the generation quality based on the following criteria:

<div class="list">

$`\bullet`$

_Fluency (Flu.)_: Is the generation fluent, grammatical, and without unnecessary repetitions?

_Persuasiveness (Per.)_: Is the text able to convince you to adopt a certain belief or attitude?

_% of arguments addressed (% Arg.)_: Does the counter speech address all claims/arguments in the supporting speech?

</div>

Fluency and persuasiveness, graded on a scale of 1 to 5, are to assess the model’s argument generation capability. To evaluate the model’s argument mining ability, we use % of arguments addressed, calculated by the number of addressed arguments in the counter speech over the total number of arguments in the supporting speech. This metric reflects how effectively the model can identify arguments, either explicitly in the two-step approach or implicitly in the one-step approach.

In Table <a href="#tab:human" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:human">[tab:human]</a>, it is evident that the end-to-end approach outperforms the pipeline approach on all 3 metrics. In specific, the pipeline approach is not able to address as many arguments as the end-to-end approach, possibly due to the potential loss of information during the intermediate step. In the pipeline method, information from the supporting speech undergoes processing, such as summarization or claim detection, before the final counter speech is generated. This might result in information loss or distortion, which could negatively impact the overall coherence and effectiveness of the generated response, which in turn affects the fluency and persuasiveness scores. In contrast, the one-step approach bypasses the intermediate stage, allowing the model to directly engage with the supporting speech and generate a counter speech in a more holistic manner. We show qualitatively in Appendix <a href="#sec:case" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:case">15</a>.

# Conclusion and Broader Impacts

In this paper, we have made several significant contributions to the field of computational argumentation research.

Firstly, our efforts in organizing the diverse landscape of argumentation-related tasks and standardizing the format of related datasets are crucial for future research in designing domain-specific large-scale models for argumentation.

Secondly, we for the first time systematically evaluate the performance of multiple computational argumentation tasks using LLMs in zero-shot and few-shot settings. Traditional approaches for computational argumentation rely heavily on supervised fine-tuning that requires a large amount of labeled data, hindering the progress of research in this field. Our exploration of low-resource settings addresses a gap in previous computational argumentation research, demonstrating the potential of LLMs in scenarios with limited training data.

Furthermore, we introduce a new counter speech generation benchmark that evaluates models’ capability in both argument mining and argument generation. Our extensive experimental results and analysis demonstrate the potential of LLMs in computational argumentation, while also highlighting existing limitations in evaluating computational argumentation tasks.

Overall, our paper provides important insights and valuable resources for researchers interested in the field of computational argumentation, which will potentially inspire further advancement in this exciting area.

# Limitation

In the field of computational argumentation, there are more tasks involved. In this work, we only cover argument mining and argument generation, as these two categories are the most fundamental in this field. By understanding and establishing the performance of these core tasks, we could progress to tackle other tasks in our future study. In addition, it is challenging and laborious to conduct human evaluation on the full argument generation datasets. To address this, we could use GPT-4 as an evaluator .

# Acknowledgments

This work was supported by DAMO Academy through DAMO Academy Research Intern Program. We would like to thank Wenxuan Zhang for providing feedback on the paper.

# More Background

## Argument Mining

Argument mining is a rapidly emerging field of NLP that aims to automatically identify and extract arguments and their components from textual data. With the increasing volume of digital text available online, the need for automated methods to analyze and understand arguments has become more pressing. By identifying the arguments in natural language text, researchers can better understand the underlying beliefs, values, and motivations that drive human behavior. As such, argument mining is a core task of research within NLP that is poised to make significant contributions to a wide range of fields.

## Argument Generation

With the understanding of the argumentative structures within the text through argument mining, the next step is to explore how to generate arguments. Argument generation and argument summarization are two related tasks within computational argumentation that have the potential to transform the way we create and consume arguments. Argument generation involves the automatic creation of persuasive text, such as generating a sentence attacking another standpoint, that can be used to influence a group of readers. Argument summarization, on the other hand, involves the automatic summarization of arguments, enabling users to quickly and easily understand complex arguments without having to read through lengthy documents. For example, in the law domain, large amounts of legal documents need to be analyzed and understood in a time-sensitive manner. As such, argument generation and summarization are two key areas of research within NLP that have the potential to significantly streamline the process of argumentation in various domains.

# Data Sample on Counter Speech Generation

Table <a href="#tab:sample" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:sample">[tab:sample]</a> shows a data sample from our benchmark dataset for the proposed counter speech generation task. The topic is “Nationalism does more harm than good”. The supporting speech is the input, and the counter speech written by humans is considered the output.

<div class="table*">

</div>

# Prompt Templates

## Prompt Templates for Argument Mining Tasks

Table <a href="#tab:step1_prompt" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:step1_prompt">[tab:step1_prompt]</a> shows the prompt templates for selected argument mining tasks, including claim detection and stance detection.

<div class="table*">

</div>

## Prompt Templates of Argument Generation Tasks

<div class="table*">

</div>

Table <a href="#tab:step2_prompt" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:step2_prompt">[tab:step2_prompt]</a> shows the prompt templates for argument generation tasks, including counter argument generation and abstractive summarization.

# Training Details of SOTA

For argument mining tasks, we train sentence-pair classifiers based on pre-trained models such as BERT following the settings reported by . Dataset statistics can be found in Table <a href="#tab:stats" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:stats">[tab:stats]</a>. For datasets where training sets are not available, we randomly sample 500 data points to reserve for the test set and make use of all the remaining for training.

For CounterArguGen, we directly evaluate based on the released predictions .

For ConcluGen , we use the available checkpoints and conduct inference on our sampled test set. The released checkpoints were trained on the reported training sets, while our 500 samples were sampled from the test sets for a proper train-test split.

For DebateSum tasks, we randomly sample 90000 data for the train set, 10000 for the development set, and 500 for the test set, since the original train test split is not specified. Specifically, for abstractive summarization, we finetune a T5-base , a popular and performant generative model, using the AdamW optimizer with a learning rate of 1e-4, a fixed batch size of 4, and 3 training epochs. For DebateSum extractive summarization, we follow the settings reported by .

<div class="table*">

</div>

# Additional Results on Argument Mining

<div class="table*">

</div>

Table <a href="#tab:zero-shot-AM-others" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:zero-shot-AM-others">[tab:zero-shot-AM-others]</a> shows the zero-shot performance of `Flan-T5-XL`, `Flan-T5-XXL` and `Llama-2-7B` on argument mining tasks.

# Quality Analysis on Argument Generation Tasks

<div class="table*">

</div>

To further support our claims in Section <a href="#sec:argu_gen_analysis" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:argu_gen_analysis">5.2</a>, we show three examples of references and predictions from the ConcluGen dataset in Table <a href="#tab:conclugen_examples" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:conclugen_examples">[tab:conclugen_examples]</a>. For instance, in the third pair, while the generated text uses “should” instead of “need to”, and “be held to the same standards” instead of “follow the same set of rules”, it effectively conveys the same meaning as the reference. These observations imply that the generated text might have used different wordings but the overall semantic meaning is similar to that of the reference text, which further supports our claims.

# Case Study on Extractive Summarization

To further support our claims in Section <a href="#sec:argu_gen_analysis" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:argu_gen_analysis">5.2</a>, we show 2 examples in Table <a href="#tab:ext_case1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:ext_case1">[tab:ext_case1]</a> and <a href="#tab:ext_case2" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:ext_case2">[tab:ext_case2]</a>. It can be observed that Longformer tends to generate incoherent sentences, while `GPT-3.5-Turbo` can generate coherent sentences and can extract important information from the input.

<div class="table*">

</div>

<div class="table*">

</div>

# Additional Results on Argument Generation

Table <a href="#tab:few-shot-AG-llama7b" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:few-shot-AG-llama7b">[tab:few-shot-AG-llama7b]</a>, <a href="#tab:few-shot-AM-llama13b" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:few-shot-AM-llama13b">[tab:few-shot-AM-llama13b]</a> and <a href="#tab:few-shot-AG-flan" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:few-shot-AG-flan">[tab:few-shot-AG-flan]</a> display the evaluation results of argument generation tasks using `Llama-2-7B`, `Llama-2-13B` and `Flan-UL2` respectively.

<div class="table*">

</div>

<div class="table*">

</div>

<div class="table*">

</div>

# Case Study on Counter Speech Generation

Table <a href="#tab:case" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:case">[tab:case]</a> shows a case study of the data sample shown in Table <a href="#tab:sample" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:sample">[tab:sample]</a> for the proposed counter speech generation task. The pipeline approach by extracting claims first tends to generate repetitive phrases, and does not attack all the claims stated in the supporting speech. In contrast, the end-to-end approach is more concise and attacks the claims in the supporting speech.

<div class="table*">

</div>

[^1]: Our data and code implementation are released at <https://github.com/DAMO-NLP-SG/LLM-argumentation>.

[^2]: Equal contribution. Guizhen Chen is under the Joint PhD Program between Alibaba and Nanyang Technological University.

[^3]: Liying Cheng is the corresponding author.

[^4]: Note that other combinations of models could be used for each approach. Here we only employ the strongest model for each task/subtask, guided by the results in Section <a href="#sec: results" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec: results">5</a>.

[^5]: We use McNemar’s test following the guidelines by .

## References

1. Aseel Addawood and Masooda~N. Bashir. 2016.
   \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/W16-2801} {“what is your evidence?” a study of controversial topics on social media}.
   \newblock In \emph{ArgMining@ACL}.
2. Ehud Aharoni, Anatoly Polnarov, Tamar Lavee, Daniel Hershcovich, Ran Levy, Ruty Rinott, Dan Gutfreund, and Noam Slonim. 2014.
   \newblock \href {https://doi.org/10.3115/v1/W14-2109} {A benchmark dataset for automatic detection of claims and evidence in the context of controversial topics}.
   \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the First Workshop on Argumentation Mining}, pages 64--68, Baltimore, Maryland. Association for Computational Linguistics.
3. Milad Alshomary, Shahbaz Syed, Martin Potthast, and Henning Wachsmuth. 2021.
   \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/2021.findings-acl.159.pdf} {Argument undermining: Counter-argument generation by attacking weak premises}.
   \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of ACL-IJCNLP}.
4. Katie Atkinson, Pietro Baroni, Massimiliano Giacomin, Anthony Hunter, Henry Prakken, Chris Reed, Guillermo~R. Simari, Matthias Thimm, and Serena Villata. 2017.
   \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:41447582} {Towards artificial argumentation}.
   \newblock \emph{AI Mag.}, 38:25--36.
5. Jianzhu Bao, Yuhang He, Yang Sun, Bin Liang, Jiachen Du, Bing Qin, Min Yang, and Ruifeng Xu. 2022.
   \newblock \href {https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.713} {A generative model for end-to-end argument mining with reconstructed positional encoding and constrained pointer mechanism}.
   \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing}, pages 10437--10449, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Computational Linguistics.
6. Joe Barrow, R.~Jain, Nedim Lipka, Franck Dernoncourt, Vlad~I. Morariu, Varun Manjunatha, Douglas~W. Oard, Philip Resnik, and Henning Wachsmuth. 2021.
   \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.126.pdf} {Syntopical graphs for computational argumentation tasks}.
   \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of ACL}.
7. Yonatan Bilu, Ariel Gera, Daniel Hershcovich, Benjamin Sznajder, Dan Lahav, Guy Moshkowich, Anael Malet, Assaf Gavron, and Noam Slonim. 2019.
   \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/P19-1097} {Argument invention from first principles}.
   \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of ACL}.
8. Alexander Bondarenko, Matthias Hagen, Martin Potthast, Henning Wachsmuth, Meriem Beloucif, Chris Biemann, Alexander Panchenko, and Benno Stein. 2020.
   \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:213019582} {Touch{\'e}: First shared task on argument retrieval}.
   \newblock \emph{Advances in Information Retrieval}, 12036:517 -- 523.
9. Tom~B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, T.~J. Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel~M. Ziegler, Jeff Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.
   \newblock \href {https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165} {Language models are few-shot learners}.
   \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2005.14165.
10. Elena Cabrio and Serena Villata. 2018.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:51609977} {Five years of argument mining: a data-driven analysis}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of IJCAI}.
11. Tuhin Chakrabarty, Christopher Hidey, Smaranda Muresan, Kathleen McKeown, and Alyssa Hwang. 2019.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/D19-1291} {Ampersand: Argument mining for persuasive online discussions}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of EMNLP-IJCNLP}.
12. Liying Cheng, Lidong Bing, Ruidan He, Qian Yu, Yan Zhang, and Luo Si. 2022.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.162} {Iam: A comprehensive and large-scale dataset for integrated argument mining tasks}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of ACL}.
13. Liying Cheng, Xingxuan Li, and Lidong Bing. 2023.
    \newblock \href {https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.15038} {Is gpt-4 a good data analyst?}
    \newblock In \emph{Findings of EMNLP}.
14. Liying Cheng, Tianyu Wu, Lidong Bing, and Luo Si. 2021.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.496.pdf} {Argument pair extraction via attention-guided multi-layer multi-cross encoding}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of ACL-IJCLP}.
15. Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung~Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh, Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi~Tay, Noam~M. Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Benton~C. Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Levskaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garc{\'i}a, Vedant Misra, Kevin Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick, Andrew~M. Dai, Thanumalayan~Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica Moreira, Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Brennan Saeta, Mark D{\'i}az, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathleen~S. Meier-Hellstern, Douglas Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov,
    and Noah Fiedel. 2022.
    \newblock \href {https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.02311} {Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2204.02311.
16. Hyung~Won Chung, Le~Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi~Tay, William Fedus, Yunxuan Li, Xuezhi Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, Albert Webson, Shixiang~Shane Gu, Zhuyun Dai, Mirac Suzgun, Xinyun Chen, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Alex Castro-Ros, Marie Pellat, Kevin Robinson, Dasha Valter, Sharan Narang, Gaurav Mishra, Adams Yu, Vincent Zhao, Yanping Huang, Andrew Dai, Hongkun Yu, Slav Petrov, Ed~H. Chi, Jeff Dean, Jacob Devlin, Adam Roberts, Denny Zhou, Quoc~V. Le, and Jason Wei. 2022.
    \newblock \href {http://arxiv.org/abs/2210.11416} {Scaling instruction-finetuned language models}.
17. Mithun Das, Saurabh~Kumar Pandey, and Animesh Mukherjee. 2023.
    \newblock \href {https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.13276} {Evaluating chatgpt's performance for multilingual and emoji-based hate speech detection}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2305.13276.
18. Xiang Deng, Vasilisa Bashlovkina, Feng Han, Simon Baumgartner, and Michael Bendersky. 2023.
    \newblock \href {https://doi.org/10.1145/3543873.3587605} {Llms to the moon? reddit market sentiment analysis with large language models}.
    \newblock \emph{Companion Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2023}.
19. Michael Denkowski and Alon Lavie. 2011.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/W11-2107/} {Meteor 1.3: Automatic metric for reliable optimization and evaluation of machine translation systems}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the sixth workshop on statistical machine translation}.
20. Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:52967399} {Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of NAACL}.
21. Emmanuelle-Anna Dietz, Antonis~C. Kakas, and Loizos Michael. 2021.
    \newblock \href {url="https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-24349-3_19"} {Computational argumentation \& cognitive ai}.
    \newblock In \emph{International Conference on Advances in Computing and Artificial Intelligence}.
22. Rotem Dror, Gili Baumer, Segev Shlomov, and Roi Reichart. 2018.
    \newblock \href {https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P18-1128} {The hitchhiker{'}s guide to testing statistical significance in natural language processing}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers)}, pages 1383--1392, Melbourne, Australia. Association for Computational Linguistics.
23. Steffen Eger, Johannes Daxenberger, and Iryna Gurevych. 2017.
    \newblock \href {https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1002} {Neural end-to-end learning for computational argumentation mining}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers)}, pages 11--22, Vancouver, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
24. Yaxin Fan and Feng Jiang. 2023.
    \newblock \href {https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.08391} {Uncovering the potential of chatgpt for discourse analysis in dialogue: An empirical study}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2305.08391.
25. Simon Frieder, Luca Pinchetti, Ryan-Rhys Griffiths, Tommaso Salvatori, Thomas Lukasiewicz, Philipp~Christian Petersen, Alexis Chevalier, and J~J Berner. 2023.
    \newblock \href {https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.13867} {Mathematical capabilities of chatgpt}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2301.13867.
26. Matthias Grabmair, Kevin~D Ashley, Ran Chen, Preethi Sureshkumar, Chen Wang, Eric Nyberg, and Vern~R Walker. 2015.
    \newblock \href {https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/2746090.2746096} {Introducing luima: an experiment in legal conceptual retrieval of vaccine injury decisions using a uima type system and tools}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of international conference on artificial intelligence and law}.
27. Biyang Guo, Xin Zhang, Ziyuan Wang, Minqi Jiang, Jinran Nie, Yuxuan Ding, Jianwei Yue, and Yupeng Wu. 2023{\natexlab{a}}.
    \newblock \href {https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.07597} {How close is chatgpt to human experts? comparison corpus, evaluation, and detection}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2301.07597.
28. Jia Guo, Liying Cheng, Wenxuan Zhang, Stanley Kok, Xin Li, and Lidong Bing. 2023{\natexlab{b}}.
    \newblock \href {https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.19902} {Aqe: Argument quadruplet extraction via a quad-tagging augmented generative approach}.
    \newblock In \emph{Findings of ACL}.
29. Zhijiang Guo, M.~Schlichtkrull, and Andreas Vlachos. 2021.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/2022.tacl-1.11} {A survey on automated fact-checking}.
    \newblock \emph{TACL}, 10:178--206.
30. Ivan Habernal and Iryna Gurevych. 2016{\natexlab{a}}.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/J17-1004.pdf} {Argumentation mining in user-generated web discourse}.
    \newblock \emph{Computational Linguistics}, 43:125--179.
31. Ivan Habernal and Iryna Gurevych. 2016{\natexlab{b}}.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/D16-1129.pdf} {What makes a convincing argument? empirical analysis and detecting attributes of convincingness in web argumentation}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of EMNLP}.
32. Ivan Habernal, Henning Wachsmuth, Iryna Gurevych, and Benno Stein. 2017.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/N18-1175} {The argument reasoning comprehension task: Identification and reconstruction of implicit warrants}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of NAACL}.
33. Andreas Hanselowski, Christian Stab, Claudia Schulz, Zile Li, and Iryna Gurevych. 2019.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/K19-1046} {A richly annotated corpus for different tasks in automated fact-checking}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/1911.01214.
34. Martin Hinton. 2019.
    \newblock \href {https://czasopisma.uni.lodz.pl/research/article/view/8224/8152} {Language and argument: a review of the field}.
    \newblock \emph{Research in Language}, 17:103 -- 93.
35. Nhat~M Hoang, Xuan~Long Do, Duc~Anh Do, Duc~Anh Vu, and Luu~Anh Tuan. 2024.
    \newblock Toxcl: A unified framework for toxic speech detection and explanation.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.16685}. [arXiv:2403.16685](https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.16685)
36. Carolin Holtermann, Anne Lauscher, and Simone~Paolo Ponzetto. 2022.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.541.pdf} {Fair and argumentative language modeling for computational argumentation}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of ACL}.
37. Zhiyuan Hu, Yue Feng, Anh~Tuan Luu, Bryan Hooi, and Aldo Lipani. 2023.
    \newblock Unlocking the potential of user feedback: Leveraging large language model as user simulators to enhance dialogue system.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management}, pages 3953--3957.
38. Xinyu Hua, Zhe Hu, and Lu~Wang. 2019.
    \newblock \href {https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P19-1255} {Argument generation with retrieval, planning, and realization}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics}, pages 2661--2672, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
39. Xinyu Hua and Lu~Wang. 2018.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/P18-1021} {Neural argument generation augmented with externally retrieved evidence}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of ACL}, pages 219--230.
40. Wenxiang Jiao, Wenxuan Wang, Jen tse Huang, Xing Wang, and Zhaopeng Tu. 2023.
    \newblock \href {https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.08745} {Is chatgpt a good translator? a preliminary study}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2301.08745.
41. Yohan Jo, Haneul Yoo, JinYeong Bak, Alice Oh, Chris Reed, and Eduard Hovy. 2021.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/2021.findings-emnlp.264} {Knowledge-enhanced evidence retrieval for counterargument generation}.
    \newblock In \emph{Findings of EMNLP}, pages 3074--3094.
42. Md~Tahmid~Rahman Laskar, M~Saiful Bari, Mizanur Rahman, Md~Amran~Hossen Bhuiyan, Shafiq Joty, and Jimmy Huang. 2023.
    \newblock \href {https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.29} {A systematic study and comprehensive evaluation of {C}hat{GPT} on benchmark datasets}.
    \newblock In \emph{Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023}, pages 431--469, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
43. Tamar Lavee, Matan Orbach, Lili Kotlerman, Yoav Kantor, Shai Gretz, Lena Dankin, Shachar Mirkin, Michal Jacovi, Yonatan Bilu, Ranit Aharonov, and Noam Slonim. 2019.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/W19-4507} {Towards effective rebuttal: Listening comprehension using corpus-wide claim mining}.
    \newblock In \emph{ArgMining@ACL}.
44. Christoph Leiter, Ran Zhang, Yanran Chen, Jonas Belouadi, Daniil Larionov, Vivian Fresen, and Steffen Eger. 2024.
    \newblock \href {https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mlwa.2024.100541} {Chatgpt: A meta-analysis after 2.5 months}.
    \newblock \emph{Machine Learning with Applications}, 16:100541.
45. Ran Levy, Yonatan Bilu, Daniel Hershcovich, Ehud Aharoni, and Noam Slonim. 2014{\natexlab{a}}.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/C14-1141.pdf} {Context dependent claim detection}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of COLING}.
46. Ran Levy, Yonatan Bilu, Daniel Hershcovich, Ehud Aharoni, and Noam Slonim. 2014{\natexlab{b}}.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/C14-1141.pdf} {Context dependent claim detection}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of ICCL}.
47. Ran Levy, Ben Bogin, Shai Gretz, Ranit Aharonov, and Noam Slonim. 2018{\natexlab{a}}.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/C18-1176} {Towards an argumentative content search engine using weak supervision}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of ICCL}, pages 2066--2081.
48. Ran Levy, Ben Bogin, Shai Gretz, Ranit Aharonov, and Noam Slonim. 2018{\natexlab{b}}.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/C18-1176} {Towards an argumentative content search engine using weak supervision}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of ICCL}.
49. Jialu Li, Esin Durmus, and Claire Cardie. 2020.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.716} {Exploring the role of argument structure in online debate persuasion}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of EMNLP}.
50. Jinyang Li, Binyuan Hui, Ge~Qu, Binhua Li, Jiaxi Yang, Bowen Li, Bailin Wang, Bowen Qin, Rongyu Cao, Ruiying Geng, Nan Huo, Chenhao Ma, Kevin~C. Chang, Fei Huang, Reynold Cheng, and Yongbin Li. 2023.
    \newblock \href {https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.03111} {Can llm already serve as a database interface? a big bench for large-scale database grounded text-to-sqls}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2305.03111.
51. Chin-Yew Lin. 2004.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/W04-1013/} {Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of ACL}.
52. Aiwei Liu, Xuming Hu, Lijie Wen, and Philip~S. Yu. 2023{\natexlab{a}}.
    \newblock \href {https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.13547} {A comprehensive evaluation of chatgpt's zero-shot text-to-sql capability}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2303.13547.
53. Chaoqun Liu, Wenxuan Zhang, Yiran Zhao, Anh~Tuan Luu, and Lidong Bing. 2024.
    \newblock Is translation all you need? a study on solving multilingual tasks with large language models.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.10258}. [arXiv:2403.10258](https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.10258)
54. Hanmeng Liu, Ruoxi Ning, Zhiyang Teng, Jian Liu, Qiji Zhou, and Yuexin Zhang. 2023{\natexlab{b}}.
    \newblock \href {https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.03439} {Evaluating the logical reasoning ability of chatgpt and gpt-4}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2304.03439.
55. Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang, Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang Zhu. 2023{\natexlab{c}}.
    \newblock \href {https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.153} {{G}-eval: {NLG} evaluation using gpt-4 with better human alignment}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing}, pages 2511--2522, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics.
56. Yiheng Liu, Tianle Han, Siyuan Ma, Jiayue Zhang, Yuanyuan Yang, Jiaming Tian, Hao He, Antong Li, Mengshen He, Zhengliang Liu, Zihao Wu, Lin Zhao, Dajiang Zhu, Xiang Li, Ning Qiang, Dingang Shen, Tianming Liu, and Bao Ge. 2023{\natexlab{d}}.
    \newblock \href {https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.metrad.2023.100017} {Summary of chatgpt-related research and perspective towards the future of large language models}.
    \newblock \emph{Meta-Radiology}, 1(2):100017.
57. Zheheng Luo, Qianqian Xie, and Sophia Ananiadou. 2023.
    \newblock \href {https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.15621} {Chatgpt as a factual inconsistency evaluator for abstractive text summarization}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2303.15621.
58. Quinn Mcnemar. 1947.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:46226024} {Note on the sampling error of the difference between correlated proportions or percentages}.
    \newblock \emph{Psychometrika}, 12:153--157.
59. Raquel Mochales and Marie-Francine Moens. 2011.
    \newblock \href {https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Argumentation-mining-Palau-Moens/eae5fbcb253f658367eca0a5a4133f613e9d0f14} {Argumentation mining}.
    \newblock \emph{Artificial Intelligence and Law}.
60. Cong-Duy Nguyen, Thong Nguyen, Duc Vu, and Anh Luu. 2023{\natexlab{a}}.
    \newblock Improving multimodal sentiment analysis: Supervised angular margin-based contrastive learning for enhanced fusion representation.
    \newblock In \emph{Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023}, pages 14714--14724.
61. Huy Nguyen, Chien Nguyen, Linh Ngo, Anh Luu, and Thien Nguyen. 2023{\natexlab{b}}.
    \newblock A spectral viewpoint on continual relation extraction.
    \newblock In \emph{Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023}, pages 9621--9629.
62. Thong~Thanh Nguyen and Anh~Tuan Luu. 2022.
    \newblock Improving neural cross-lingual abstractive summarization via employing optimal transport distance for knowledge distillation.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence}, pages 11103--11111.
63. OpenAI. 2023.
    \newblock \href {https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt} {Introducing chatgpt}.
64. Liangming Pan, Xiaobao Wu, Xinyuan Lu, Anh~Tuan Luu, William~Yang Wang, Min-Yen Kan, and Preslav Nakov. 2023{\natexlab{a}}.
    \newblock Fact-checking complex claims with program-guided reasoning.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.12744}. [arXiv:2305.12744](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.12744)
65. Wenbo Pan, Qiguang Chen, Xiao Xu, Wanxiang Che, and Libo Qin. 2023{\natexlab{b}}.
    \newblock \href {https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.04256} {A preliminary evaluation of chatgpt for zero-shot dialogue understanding}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2304.04256.
66. Andreas Peldszus and Manfred Stede. 2013.
    \newblock \href {https://people.cs.pitt.edu/~huynv/research/argument-mining/From%20Argument%20Diagrams%20to%20Argumentation%20Mining%20in%20Texts%20A%20Survey.pdf} {From argument diagrams to argumentation mining in texts: A survey}.
    \newblock \emph{Int. J. Cogn. Informatics Nat. Intell.}, 7:1--31.
67. Phuoc Van~Long Pham, Anh~Vu Duc, Nhat~Minh Hoang, Xuan~Long Do, and Anh~Tuan Luu. 2024.
    \newblock Chatgpt as a math questioner? evaluating chatgpt on generating pre-university math questions.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 39th ACM/SIGAPP Symposium on Applied Computing}, pages 65--73.
68. Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter~J. Liu. 2020.
    \newblock \href {http://jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-074.html} {Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer}.
    \newblock \emph{Journal of Machine Learning Research}, 21(140):1--67.
69. Ruty Rinott, Lena Dankin, Carlos~Alzate Perez, Mitesh~M. Khapra, Ehud Aharoni, and Noam Slonim. 2015.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/D15-1050} {Show me your evidence - an automatic method for context dependent evidence detection}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of EMNLP}.
70. Allen Roush and Arvind Balaji. 2020.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/2020.argmining-1.1} {Debatesum: A large-scale argument mining and summarization dataset}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2011.07251.
71. Benjamin Schiller, Johannes Daxenberger, and Iryna Gurevych. 2020.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.34} {Aspect-controlled neural argument generation}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of NAACL}.
72. Paulo Shakarian, Abhinav Koyyalamudi, Noel Ngu, and Lakshmivihari Mareedu. 2023.
    \newblock \href {https://ceur-ws.org/Vol-3433/paper8.pdf} {An independent evaluation of chatgpt on mathematical word problems {(MWP)}}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the {AAAI} 2023 Spring Symposium on Challenges Requiring the Combination of Machine Learning and Knowledge Engineering {(AAAI-MAKE} 2023), Hyatt Regency, San Francisco Airport, California, USA, March 27-29, 2023}, volume 3433 of \emph{{CEUR} Workshop Proceedings}. CEUR-WS.org.
73. Chenhui Shen, Liying Cheng, Yang You, and Lidong Bing. 2023.
    \newblock \href {https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.13091} {Large language models are not yet human-level evaluators for abstractive summarization}.
    \newblock In \emph{Findings of EMNLP}.
74. Eyal Shnarch, Carlos Alzate, Lena Dankin, Martin Gleize, Yufang Hou, Leshem Choshen, Ranit Aharonov, and Noam Slonim. 2018.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/P18-2095} {Will it blend? blending weak and strong labeled data in a neural network for argumentation mining}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of ACL}.
75. Eyal Shnarch, Leshem Choshen, Guy Moshkowich, Noam Slonim, and Ranit Aharonov. 2020.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/2020.findings-emnlp.243} {Unsupervised expressive rules provide explainability and assist human experts grasping new domains}.
    \newblock In \emph{Findings of EMNLP}.
76. Noam Slonim, Yonatan Bilu, Carlos Alzate, Roy Bar-Haim, Ben Bogin, Francesca Bonin, Leshem Choshen, Edo Cohen-Karlik, Lena Dankin, Lilach Edelstein, et~al. 2021.
    \newblock \href {https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-021-03215-w} {An autonomous debating system}.
    \newblock \emph{Nature}.
77. Parinaz Sobhani, Diana Inkpen, and Xiaodan Zhu. 2017.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/E17-2088.pdf} {A dataset for multi-target stance detection}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of EACL}.
78. Christian Stab and Iryna Gurevych. 2016.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/J17-3005.pdf} {Parsing argumentation structures in persuasive essays}.
    \newblock \emph{Computational Linguistics}, 43:619--659.
79. Shahbaz Syed, Khalid Al-Khatib, Milad Alshomary, Henning Wachsmuth, and Martin Potthast. 2021.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/2021.findings-acl.306.pdf} {Generating informative conclusions for argumentative texts}.
    \newblock In \emph{Findings of ACL}.
80. Yiming Tan, Dehai Min, Y.~Li, Wenbo Li, Na~Hu, Yongrui Chen, and Guilin Qi. 2023.
    \newblock \href {https://arxiv.org/pdf/2312.07592.pdf} {Evaluation of chatgpt as a question answering system for answering complex questions}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2303.07992.
81. Yi~Tay, Mostafa Dehghani, Vinh~Q. Tran, Xavier Garc{\'i}a, Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Hyung~Won Chung, Dara Bahri, Tal Schuster, Huaixiu~Steven Zheng, Denny Zhou, Neil Houlsby, and Donald Metzler. 2022.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:252780443} {Ul2: Unifying language learning paradigms}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of ICLR}.
82. James Thorne, Andreas Vlachos, Christos Christodoulopoulos, and Arpit Mittal. 2018.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/N18-1074.pdf} {{FEVER}: a large-scale dataset for fact extraction and {VERification}}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of NAACL-HLT}.
83. Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timoth{\'e}e Lacroix, Baptiste Rozi{\`e}re, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aur'elien Rodriguez, Armand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. 2023{\natexlab{a}}.
    \newblock \href {https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.13971} {Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2302.13971.
84. Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et~al. 2023{\natexlab{b}}.
    \newblock \href {https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.09288} {Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models}.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288}. [arXiv:2307.09288](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.09288)
85. Frans~H Van~Eemeren, Robert Grootendorst, and Rob Grootendorst. 2004.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:260815631} {\emph{A systematic theory of argumentation: The pragma-dialectical approach}}.
    \newblock Cambridge University Press.
86. Henning Wachsmuth, Nona Naderi, Yufang Hou, Yonatan Bilu, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Tim~Alberdingk Thijm, Graeme Hirst, and Benno Stein. 2017.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/E17-1017.pdf} {Computational argumentation quality assessment in natural language}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of EACL}.
87. Henning Wachsmuth, Shahbaz Syed, and Benno Stein. 2018.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/P18-1023} {Retrieval of the best counterargument without prior topic knowledge}.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of ACL}.
88. Douglas Walton, Christopher Reed, and Fabrizio Macagno. 2008.
    \newblock \href {https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:36339677} {\emph{Argumentation schemes}}.
    \newblock Cambridge University Press.
89. Jiaan Wang, Yunlong Liang, Fandong Meng, Zhixu Li, Jianfeng Qu, and Jie Zhou. 2023{\natexlab{a}}.
    \newblock \href {https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.14229} {Cross-lingual summarization via chatgpt}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2302.14229.
90. Jiaan Wang, Yunlong Liang, Fandong Meng, Haoxiang Shi, Zhixu Li, Jinan Xu, Jianfeng Qu, and Jie Zhou. 2023{\natexlab{b}}.
    \newblock \href {https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.04048} {Is chatgpt a good nlg evaluator? a preliminary study}.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04048}. [arXiv:2303.04048](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.04048)
91. Zengzhi Wang, Qiming Xie, Zixiang Ding, Yi~Feng, and Rui Xia. 2023{\natexlab{c}}.
    \newblock \href {https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.04339} {Is chatgpt a good sentiment analyzer? a preliminary study}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2304.04339.
92. Jingfeng Yang, Hongye Jin, Ruixiang Tang, Xiaotian Han, Qizhang Feng, Haoming Jiang, Shaochen Zhong, Bing Yin, and Xia Hu. 2024.
    \newblock \href {https://doi.org/10.1145/3649506} {Harnessing the power of llms in practice: A survey on chatgpt and beyond}.
    \newblock \emph{ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data}.
    \newblock Just Accepted.
93. Xianjun Yang, Yan Li, Xinlu Zhang, Haifeng Chen, and Wei Cheng. 2023.
    \newblock \href {https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.08081} {Exploring the limits of chatgpt for query or aspect-based text summarization}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2302.08081.
94. Chenhan Yuan, Qianqian Xie, and Sophia Ananiadou. 2023.
    \newblock \href {https://aclanthology.org/2023.bionlp-1.7} {Zero-shot temporal relation extraction with chatgpt}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2304.05454.
95. Haopeng Zhang, Xiao Liu, and Jiawei Zhang. 2023{\natexlab{a}}.
    \newblock \href {https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.04193} {Extractive summarization via chatgpt for faithful summary generation}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2304.04193.
96. Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian~Q. Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. 2019.
    \newblock \href {https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.09675} {Bertscore: Evaluating text generation with bert}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/1904.09675.
97. Wenxuan Zhang, Yue Deng, Bing-Quan Liu, Sinno~Jialin Pan, and Lidong Bing. 2023{\natexlab{b}}.
    \newblock \href {https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.15005} {Sentiment analysis in the era of large language models: A reality check}.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2305.15005.
98. Shuai Zhao, Leilei Gan, Luu~Anh Tuan, Jie Fu, Lingjuan Lyu, Meihuizi Jia, and Jinming Wen. 2024.
    \newblock Defending against weight-poisoning backdoor attacks for parameter-efficient fine-tuning.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.12168}. [arXiv:2402.12168](https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.12168)
99. Shuai Zhao, Jinming Wen, Luu~Anh Tuan, Junbo Zhao, and Jie Fu. 2023.
    \newblock Prompt as triggers for backdoor attack: Examining the vulnerability in language models.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.01219}. [arXiv:2305.01219](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.01219)
100. Yandan Zheng, Anran Hao, and Anh~Tuan Luu. 2023.
     \newblock Jointprop: joint semi-supervised learning for entity and relation extraction with heterogeneous graph-based propagation.
     \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15872}. [arXiv:2305.15872](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.15872)
101. Qihuang Zhong, Liang Ding, Juhua Liu, Bo~Du, and Dacheng Tao. 2023.
     \newblock \href {https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.10198} {Can chatgpt understand too? a comparative study on chatgpt and fine-tuned bert}.
     \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2302.10198.
