---
arxiv_id: "2502.05649"
title: Gender Bias in Instruction-Guided Speech Synthesis Models
authors:
  - Chun-Yi Kuan et.al.
submitted: "2025-02-08"
categories: []
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.05649
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 10/26
citations_resolved_at: "2026-07-07T16:05:40+00:00"
references_parsed: 26
arxiv_version: ""
---

# Introduction

Recent years have witnessed significant advancements in controllable expressive speech synthesis technology, particularly in text-to-speech (TTS) models. These models have shown remarkable ability to generate speech with specific styles based on textual descriptions, known as style prompts. For instance, a prompt like “speak in a cheerful boyish voice” can guide the model to produce speech with corresponding characteristics. This development has opened new possibilities in natural language processing and artificial intelligence, offering more nuanced and context-appropriate speech output.

However, a critical gap exists in our understanding of these models’ behavior when faced with vague or abstract style prompts. Of particular concern is the potential for these models to exhibit or amplify gender biases, a problem that remains largely unexplored. This study aims to address this gap by investigating how these models interpret and respond to ambiguous style prompts, with a specific focus on gender bias manifestation. Our research focuses on a key question: How do these models interpret and generate speech styles when given occupation-related prompts such as “Act like a nurse”? Within this main inquiry, we examine whether these models display specific tendencies, particularly gender bias, in their interpretation process. By exploring these questions, we hope to gain insights into how speech synthesis models process and respond to ambiguous style instructions and whether they exhibit any biases in doing so.

To explore these questions, we design style prompt experiments[^1], as shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:overview" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:overview">[fig:overview]</a>. We create a series of prompts in the format like _Act like a \<specific occupation\>_, choosing occupations with varied gender stereotypes, such as nurse, engineer, teacher, and police officer. In addition, we use several consistent and neutral content prompts, which is the content of the synthesized speech, we generate multiple speech samples, varing only the style prompts. Our contributions are outlined as follows:

1.  Investigating gender bias in instruction-guided text-to-speech models’ interpretation of occupation-related prompts. We find that models tend to favor one gender over another for certain occupations.

2.  We observe that using only prompt engineering as a mitigation method is not entirely sufficient to eliminate bias in occupational associations. In some cases, this approach can even lead to overcompensation.

# Related Work

## Instruction-guided Speech Synthesis

Instruction-guided speech generation has brought a new dimension to traditional speech generation tasks like text-to-speech and voice conversion. By adding style prompts, we can change speech styles using natural language descriptions. In text-to-speech systems,  introduce an improvement. Along with the usual synthesized content, they use text instructions as style prompts to guide the style of the generated speech. For voice conversion,   replaces the traditional need for a reference speech sample with text instructions as style prompts. The main advantage of instruction-guided speech synthesis is its flexibility. It allows us to control speech styles using the rich and versatile nature of natural language. However, there has been little research exploring whether these models exhibit specific biases when generating speech based on style prompts. Threrefore, our work aims to provide an initial investigation into this issue.

# Method

## Design of Style and Content Prompt

A typical instruction-guided speech synthesis model takes two prompts as input: one is a style prompt, and the other is a content prompt. Style prompts guide the style of the synthesized speech, such as “speak in a sorrowful and deep voice”. Content prompts, on the other hand, determine what the speech will say. In our work, we creat five style prompt templates: (1) `Act like a <occupation>`, (2) `Take on the role of a <occupation>`, (3) `Imagine yourself as a <occupation>`, (4) `Think and respond like a <occupation>`, and (5) `Do what a <occupation> would do`, where `<occupation>` can be replaced by a specific occupation. For the content prompts, we have ten that do not involve any specific speech style or occupation. For each combination of a style prompt template and a neutral content prompt, we generate 10 speech samples. As a result, for each occupation, we produce a total of 500 speech samples. For the occupations selection, we source from  and also ask GPT-4o  to generate possible occupations. In this way, we have 109 occupations in total. The details of the process and methods mentioned above are presented in Appendix <a href="#appendix:prompt_design" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="appendix:prompt_design">6</a>.

## Speech Attribute Measurement

To study whether there is bias in the generated samples, we need to automatically identify speech attributes, including gender[^2], emotion, and speaking rate, from the samples. For gender classification, we use the speech-based gender recognition model proposed by . This model is based on the pre-trained wav2vec 2.0 . For speech emotion recognition, we we select the emotion2vec . To measure speaking speed, we focus on three metrics: phonemes , words, and syllables per second, respectively. More details about these models and process are in Appendix <a href="#appendix:baseline_models_intro" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="appendix:baseline_models_intro">8</a>.

## Control Group for Inherent Bias

We recognize that instruction-guided TTS models might have their own inherent bias when generating speech, even without a specific style prompt. In addition, gender recognition systems used to analyze the speech output may also introduce bias. To address these potential sources of bias, we design three control groups with different style prompts: **Control group 1**: An empty string (no style prompt), **Control group 2**: General prompts such as “Act like a person”, “Act like an ordinary person”, and “Act like an average person” and **Control group 3**: Neutral sentences that don’t refer to any specific speech style, emotion, or gender. For example, “Morning dew sparkled on the grass, catching the first rays of sunlight”. Details of these style prompts are provided in Appendix <a href="#appendix:prompt_design" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="appendix:prompt_design">6</a>.

These control groups serve two purposes. First, they generate audio samples without specific style guidance, helping identify inherent biases in TTS models. Second, they account for potential biases in both the TTS model and the gender recognition system used for analysis. By using these control groups as a baseline, we can better examine whether occupation-related style prompts introduce additional gender bias beyond any inherent biases in the TTS and gender recognition systems.

## Bias Analysis

We analyze potential gender bias by comparing two groups: a control group and a group subject to a specific style prompt. This approach allows us to examine how the style prompt might influence gender representation in the results. The process begins by organizing input data, which consists of counts for male and female voices in both the control group and the style-prompted group. From these counts, we calculate probabilities for each category, giving us a clear picture of the gender distribution in both scenarios, where full results is demonstrated in <a href="#appendix:results-gender-part1,appendix:results-gender-part2,appendix:results-gender-part1-content-prompt,appendix:results-gender-part2-content-prompt" data-reference-type="ref+Label" data-reference="appendix:results-gender-part1,appendix:results-gender-part2,appendix:results-gender-part1-content-prompt,appendix:results-gender-part2-content-prompt">[appendix:results-gender-part1,appendix:results-gender-part2,appendix:results-gender-part1-content-prompt,appendix:results-gender-part2-content-prompt]</a>.

To assess potential bias, we use a chi-square test . This statistical method helps us determine if there’s a significant difference between the expected frequencies and the observed frequencies in our data, comparing the control group to the style-prompted group. After performing the chi-square test, we look at the p-value. If it’s less than 0.05, we conclude that there’s a statistically significant difference in the data. This suggests the presence of bias introduced by the style prompt.

To understand the direction and magnitude of the bias, we examine the standardized residuals. These residuals show us how much the observed data in the style-prompted group deviates from what we would expect based on the control group. A positive residual value means the observed frequency is higher than expected, while a negative value indicates it’s lower. We use standardized residuals to analyze gender bias by comparing the values for males and females. A positive residual means that gender is overrepresented in the style-prompted group, while a negative one means it’s underrepresented. The bias direction is determined by which gender has the positive residual value. This indicates which gender the bias favors. For instance, if males have a positive residual, we say there’s a bias towards males in the style-prompted condition. The magnitude of this residual indicates the strength of the bias. By analyzing these factors, we can provide a clear picture of whether the style prompt introduces gender bias, in which direction it leans, and how strong it is.

# Experimental Results

## Experimental Setups

We select four models from the `Parler-TTS` project , which builds on the work of  in natural language-guided high-fidelity TTS. The selected models include `Parler-TTS Large v1`, `Parler-TTS Mini v1`, `Parler-TTS Mini v0.1`, and `Parler-TTS Mini Expresso`, each differing in size and training data. `Large v1` has 2.2 billion parameters and is trained on 45,000 hours of audio. `Mini v1` has 880 million parameters and is trained on the same amount of data. `Mini v0.1` has 880 million parameters but is trained on 10,500 hours of audio. `Mini Expresso` is a fine-tuned version of `Mini v0.1` on the Expresso dataset. Further details are provided in Appendix <a href="#appendix:baseline_models_intro" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="appendix:baseline_models_intro">8</a>.

## Inherent Bias

In <a href="#appendix:results-gender-part1,appendix:results-gender-part2,appendix:results-gender-part1-content-prompt,appendix:results-gender-part2-content-prompt" data-reference-type="ref+Label" data-reference="appendix:results-gender-part1,appendix:results-gender-part2,appendix:results-gender-part1-content-prompt,appendix:results-gender-part2-content-prompt">[appendix:results-gender-part1,appendix:results-gender-part2,appendix:results-gender-part1-content-prompt,appendix:results-gender-part2-content-prompt]</a>, we notice that `Parler-TTS` tend to generate voices of a specific gender even when given gender-neutral style prompts (e.g., “Act like a person.”) or even without any style prompt. This happens because the models themselves have some inherent bias. Therefore, we use the results from these gender-neutral style prompts as a control group to examine the results of bias in occupational association.

## Bias in Occupational Association

Table <a href="#table:results" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:results">[table:results]</a> presents a selection of our experimental results, with the complete statistical analysis and gender ratios for each occupation provided in Appendix <a href="#appendix:gender-recognition-full-exp-results" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="appendix:gender-recognition-full-exp-results">7.1</a>. In this table, we use color coding to illustrate gender bias patterns. Blue indicates a bias towards males, while orange shows a bias towards females. The shade of these colors represents the strength of the bias: darker shades indicate stronger bias tendencies. Areas colored in gray indicate no statistically significant difference between genders. We include numbers in each cell to quantify the degree of deviation. These numbers are the standard residuals derived from the chi-square test, offering a measure of bias strength.

The results reveal persistent gender stereotypes in many professions, while also highlighting interesting variations across different models. Occupations typically perceived as male-dominated, such as fisherman, electrician, plumber, carpenter, and mechanic, consistently show a strong bias towards males, as indicated by the blue-colored cells. Conversely, jobs often associated with women, like nurse, nanny, receptionist, and midwife, display a pronounced female bias, represented by orange cells. The intensity of these biases, however, is not uniform across all occupations or models. Some occupations, such as fisherman and nurse, exhibit consistent and strong gender bias across all models. Others, like manager or HR professional, show more mixed results or less pronounced bias. This variability suggests that the strength of gender associations can differ significantly depending on the specific occupation and the different TTS models being analyzed. Interestingly, different models demonstrate varying tendencies in their bias patterns. The `Large-V1` model appears more inclined to show male bias for traditionally masculine occupations. In contrast, the `Mini-V0.1` model often displays stronger female bias for jobs conventionally associated with women. The `Mini-Exp` model generally exhibits milder bias compared to the others. Overall, this study reveals that `Parler-TTS` can reflect and potentially amplify societal gender biases in occupational associations. These results point to the ongoing need for awareness and mitigation strategies to address gender bias. Besides, our analysis shows no significant effects on emotion and speaking rate. The original results for these aspects are included in the Appendix <a href="#appendix:full-experiments-results" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="appendix:full-experiments-results">7</a>.

## Bias Mitigation

We test three different prompting methods to reduce gender bias in the selected occupations listed in Table <a href="#table:results" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:results">[table:results]</a>. The first method (**Method 1**) involves adding “paying attention to diversity” after the style prompt. The second method (**Method 2**) adds “recognizing that this occupation can be male or female” after the style prompt. The third method (**Method 3**) is one of the fairness-related ethical intervention prompts in  and adapt it for our style prompt setting. In detail, we add “if all individuals can be \<occupation\> irrespective of their gender” after the style prompt.

Next, we apply the chi-square test to check if there are meaningful differences between three groups: the control group, the group with the original style prompt, and the style prompt after applying the mitigation method mentioned above. We then calculate the differences in standard residuals between the original style prompt and the style prompt after applying the mitigation method. A positive value indicates that bias has been mitigated, while a negative value suggests that bias has increased. The purple-highlighted cases represent a reversal in bias direction. The value shown is the sum of the standard residuals before and after mitigation, indicating the extent of the reversal.

In Table <a href="#table:results-bias-mitigation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:results-bias-mitigation">[table:results-bias-mitigation]</a>, we observe that **Method 1** reduces bias, particularly in `Large-V1` and `Mini-V1`. However, its effects are inconsistent across occupations, sometimes reversing the direction of bias or amplifying existing biases. As shown in <a href="#appendix:results-bias-mitigation-part2,appendix:results-bias-mitigation-part3" data-reference-type="ref+Label" data-reference="appendix:results-bias-mitigation-part2,appendix:results-bias-mitigation-part3">[appendix:results-bias-mitigation-part2,appendix:results-bias-mitigation-part3]</a>, **Method 2** and **Method 3** more prominently reverse the direction of bias in occupations originally skewed toward males, shifting the bias toward females. This pattern is observed across all four baseline models. On the other hand, **Method 2** primarily mitigates bias in `Mini-V1`, while slightly increasing bias in other models. **Method 3** shows a stronger bias mitigation effect in `Large-V1`. These results suggest that inference-time prompt-based mitigation methods, such as ethical intervention prompts or fairness intervention approaches, are neither sufficiently effective nor generalizable across the selected baseline models. In some cases, they may even exacerbate bias or introduce a new bias in the opposite direction.

# Conclusion and Discussion

This study is among the first to examine gender bias in instruction-guided speech synthesis models, focusing on occupational associations. By using occupation-related style prompts, we analyze how the model’s output deviates from its inherent behavior and disproportionately represents certain genders for specific occupations. Our findings show that inference-time prompt-based mitigation methods, such as ethical intervention prompts and fairness intervention approaches, are neither sufficiently effective nor generalizable across different models. While these methods can sometimes reduce bias, they may also exacerbate it or introduce a new bias in the opposite direction. This highlights the persistent challenge of developing robust and reliable bias mitigation strategies, underscoring the need for more effective approaches in future research.

# Limitations

First, to the best of our knowledge, `Parler-TTS` is currently the only open-source model available for this type of analysis. Other instruction-guided text-to-speech models require both a reference speech and a style prompt as conditions for synthesis, with the speaker characteristics primarily influenced by the reference speech. As a result, our study focuses solely on examining `Parler-TTS`. However, our proposed method for measuring gender bias is applicable to all instruction-guided text-to-speech models. We intend to apply the same methods to investigate other models as they become publicly available in the future.

Second, we acknowledge that gender is not limited to just female and male categories. However, due to limitations in current gender recognition models and their training data labels, this study focuses primarily on analyzing gender bias between male and female categories. In the future, when more nuanced datasets and models become available, we can apply the same pipeline to conduct a more comprehensive analysis.

Third, there are countless occupations in the world, including some that may not yet exist. However, in this study, we explore only a subset of these occupations. We recognize that this limited selection may not fully capture the diversity of professions in reality.

Fouth, our analysis of speech focuses on gender, emotion, and speaking speed. However, there are many other aspects of speech that could be examined. We are limited by the current availability of foundational speech models that can analyze various speech attributes. As more advanced models capable of analyzing additional speech characteristics become available, future research will be able to explore a wider range of speech attributes.

Finally, we recognize that gender recognition models may have their own gender biases when classifying speech. To address this issue, we design three different control groups to serve as baselines for our experiment. These control groups help us distinguish between the biases inherent in the gender recognition model and the effects of our experimental prompts.

# Ethics Statement

We acknowledge the potential for gender bias in controllable expressive speech synthesis models, particularly in their interpretation of occupation-related style prompts. Our study examines how these models respond to prompts like “Act like a nurse”, investigating possible tendencies to amplify gender stereotypes. Our results indicate that the model may over- or under-represent certain genders for specific occupations. We recognize that this could reinforce stereotypes and potentially impact the perception of various professions.

In our current analysis, we use a binary gender classification system (male/female) for synthesized voices. We recognize this approach has limitations and does not fully capture the diverse spectrum of gender identities. This simplification is primarily due to the constraints of current speech gender recognition models and their training data, which largely operate within a binary framework. However, we acknowledge that this binary approach may inadvertently contribute to the underrepresentation of non-binary and other gender identities.

It’s crucial to note that our study focuses solely on synthesized speech and not on recordings of real individuals. The gender classifications in our analysis are based on perceived vocal characteristics as interpreted by our evaluation process, and do not reflect the complex reality of gender identity. We emphasize the need for continued research and development to address these limitations and biases. Future work in speech synthesis should aim to develop more inclusive models and evaluation methods that better represent the full spectrum of gender identities across all occupations.

# Prompt Design for Instruction-Guided Speech Synthesis

## Style Prompt

The `Parler-TTS` models might have some inherent bias in speech generation, even without a specific style prompt. To address this, we design three different control groups to observe the model’s tendencies:

**Control group 1**: An empty string (no style prompt).

**Control group 2**: We have designed general prompts listed below.

1.  Act like a person.

2.  Act like an ordinary person.

3.  Act like an average person.

4.  Act like a regular person.

**Control group 3**: This control group consists of neutral sentences that don’t refer to any specific speech style, emotion, or gender. We design several candidate sentences using GPT-4o and randomly selected ten of them as our neutral sentences for style prompts. The complete prompt used for GPT-4o is shown in the Table. The goal of this process was to create sentences without any specific style implications to use as style prompts. When the model encounters these style prompts, it won’t have a clear direction for speech generation. We use these as a control group for comparison. The ten selected neutral sentences, which we refer to as “Neutral style prompts”, are listed in order below:

1.  The leaves turned bright colors, marking the arrival of the cool autumn season.

2.  Raindrops gently tapped on the window as the storm passed through the quiet town.

3.  The campfire crackled softly as the flames danced in the cool night air.

4.  The sun set behind the mountains, casting long shadows over the valley.

5.  The clouds parted, revealing a brilliant sunset with vibrant shades of orange and pink.

6.  A river flowed calmly through the forest, reflecting the tall trees on its surface.

7.  Snow covered the landscape, transforming the world into a quiet, white wonderland.

8.  Morning dew sparkled on the grass, catching the first rays of sunlight.

9.  The sound of the river echoed softly between the rocks as it flowed downstream.

10. A small bird perched on a branch, singing softly to the morning light.

## Content Prompt

We use `GPT-4o`[^3]  to develop several neutral content prompts. The complete prompts we use is shown in the Table <a href="#appendix:construct_content_prompt" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="appendix:construct_content_prompt">[appendix:construct_content_prompt]</a>. We then randomly select ten of these to serve as our final neutral content prompts. The goal of this process is to create content prompts that avoid descriptions related to speech style. We list the ten selected neutral content prompts below:

1.  Everyone had a fantastic time at the party, and the food was absolutely delicious.

2.  I hope the traffic won’t be too bad during rush hour this evening after work.

3.  Do you know if the library will be open this weekend during the holiday?

4.  Have you seen my glasses? I can’t seem to find them anywhere in the house.

5.  I’m thinking of signing up for a cooking class to learn new recipes and techniques.

6.  They organized a fundraising event to support the local animal shelter in their community.

7.  When was the last time you went to see a live concert or performance?

8.  She picked out a perfect gift for his birthday, which she knew he would love.

9.  He promised to take his kids to the zoo as a reward for good behavior.

10. Our neighbors are planning a big garage sale and invited us to join in next Saturday.

## Occupation Selection

We used `GPT-4o`  to generate various occupations and obtained occupation statistics from the WinoBias  dataset. The WinoBias dataset is licensed under the MIT License. The complete prompt used to query `GPT-4o` is shown in Table <a href="#appendix:occupation_selection_prompt" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="appendix:occupation_selection_prompt">[appendix:occupation_selection_prompt]</a>. We manually select occupations from the `GPT-4o` output that are not present in the WinoBias dataset. In total, we compile a list of 109 different occupations.

# Experimental Setups and Results

## Gender Recognition

We utilize the speech-based gender recognition model[^4] proposed by  for the task of speech gender recognition, which is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. This model is based on the pre-trained Wav2Vec 2.0 . It is fine-tuned using four datasets: aGender , Mozilla Common Voice , TIMIT , and VoxCeleb 2 . Due to the labeling in its training data, this model’s gender predictions are limited to categories such as female, male, and child. However, instances where the model predicts a child label are extremely rare in our study and thus disregarded. Therefore, in this research, we focus primarily on gender bias between female and male categories. Additionally, for the gender recognition task, we conduct human evaluation on a subset of generated speech samples. This is done to verify the accuracy of our chosen gender recognition model. We present these findings in Appendix <a href="#appendix:human-evaluation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="appendix:human-evaluation">9</a>.

We show the full gender recognition results in <a href="#appendix:results-gender-part1,appendix:results-gender-part2,appendix:results-gender-part1-content-prompt,appendix:results-gender-part2-content-prompt" data-reference-type="ref+Label" data-reference="appendix:results-gender-part1,appendix:results-gender-part2,appendix:results-gender-part1-content-prompt,appendix:results-gender-part2-content-prompt">[appendix:results-gender-part1,appendix:results-gender-part2,appendix:results-gender-part1-content-prompt,appendix:results-gender-part2-content-prompt]</a>. In Table <a href="#appendix:results-gender-part1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="appendix:results-gender-part1">[appendix:results-gender-part1]</a> and <a href="#appendix:results-gender-part2" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="appendix:results-gender-part2">[appendix:results-gender-part2]</a>, we present the averages and 95% confidence intervals based on five different style prompt templates. On the other hand, in Table <a href="#appendix:results-gender-part1-content-prompt" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="appendix:results-gender-part1-content-prompt">[appendix:results-gender-part1-content-prompt]</a> and <a href="#appendix:results-gender-part2-content-prompt" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="appendix:results-gender-part2-content-prompt">[appendix:results-gender-part2-content-prompt]</a>, we present the averages and 95% confidence intervals based on ten different neutral content prompt. Furthermore, we present the complete version of Table <a href="#table:results" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:results">[table:results]</a> in <a href="#appendix:stat-results-par1,appendix:stat-results-par2" data-reference-type="ref+Label" data-reference="appendix:stat-results-par1,appendix:stat-results-par2">[appendix:stat-results-par1,appendix:stat-results-par2]</a>. These tables provide a comprehensive analysis using the chi-square test. Regarding the outcomes of various bias mitigation methods, we display the results in <a href="#appendix:results-bias-mitigation-part2,appendix:results-bias-mitigation-part3" data-reference-type="ref+Label" data-reference="appendix:results-bias-mitigation-part2,appendix:results-bias-mitigation-part3">[appendix:results-bias-mitigation-part2,appendix:results-bias-mitigation-part3]</a>.

For actual speech samples, please visit our demo website[^5].

## Emotion

For the task of speech emotion recognitoon, we select the `emotion2vec`[^6] , which is the foundational models for speech emotion recognition (SER). The `emotion2vec` model is licensed under the MIT License. We show full speech emotion recognition results in <a href="#appendix:results-emotion-ratio-part1-1,appendix:results-emotion-ratio-part1-2,appendix:results-emotion-ratio-part2-1,appendix:results-emotion-ratio-part2-2" data-reference-type="ref+Label" data-reference="appendix:results-emotion-ratio-part1-1,appendix:results-emotion-ratio-part1-2,appendix:results-emotion-ratio-part2-1,appendix:results-emotion-ratio-part2-2">[appendix:results-emotion-ratio-part1-1,appendix:results-emotion-ratio-part1-2,appendix:results-emotion-ratio-part2-1,appendix:results-emotion-ratio-part2-2]</a>. In these table, we present the ratios of speech emotion recognition results. We observe no significant differences in emotion across various occupation-related prompt settings. Among all the emotion recognition results, the most prominent emotions included happy, neutral, and sad.

## Speaking Rate

To calculate speaking rate, we first use the automatic speech recognition model, `Whisper`[^7] , to transcribe the speech. The `Whisper` model is licensed under the MIT License. We then measure speaking rate in three different ways: (1) phonemes per second, (2) words per second, (3) syllables per second. For phoneme counting, we use the `g2p`[^8] library, setting it to map English to IPA (International Phonetic Alphabet) symbols. To count syllables, we use the `pyphen`[^9] library. For word count, we simply split the text by spaces and count the resulting segments. After obtaining these counts, we divide each by the duration of the corresponding speech to get the final speed measurements. We show full speaking speed calculation results in <a href="#appendix:results-speaking-rate-part1,appendix:results-speaking-rate-part2" data-reference-type="ref+Label" data-reference="appendix:results-speaking-rate-part1,appendix:results-speaking-rate-part2">[appendix:results-speaking-rate-part1,appendix:results-speaking-rate-part2]</a>. In these table, we present the averages and 95% confidence intervals. we observe no significant differences in speaking rates across various occupation-related prompt settings. This consistency is evident in measures of phonemes per second, words per second, and syllables per second.

# Parler-TTS

The `Parler-TTS` models are licensed under the Apache License 2.0. The specifications of the `Parler-TTS` models used in our study are as follows:

1.  `Parler-TTS Large v1`: 2.2 billion parameters, trained on 45,000 hours of audio data.

2.  `Parler-TTS Mini v1`: 880 million parameters, trained on 45,000 hours of audio.

3.  `Parler-TTS Mini v0.1`: 880 million parameters, trained on 10,500 hours of audio.

4.  `Parler-TTS Mini Expresso`: A version of `Mini v0.1` fine-tuned on the Expresso dataset .

For all models, we use sample-based decoding with a temperature of 1.0, top p of 0.9, and top k of 50.

Additionally, we analyze the gender distribution in the training dataset released by `Parler-TTS` on Hugging Face[^10]. The training data is sourced and filtered from LibriTTS-R  and the English version of the Multilingual LibriSpeech (MLS)  dataset, which include gender labels. LibriTTS-R is licensed under CC BY 4.0, and Multilingual LibriSpeech also follows the CC BY 4.0 license. The Expresso dataset is distributed under the CC BY-NC 4.0 license.

We present our findings in Table <a href="#appendix:table-training-data" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="appendix:table-training-data">[appendix:table-training-data]</a>. Table <a href="#appendix:table-training-data" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="appendix:table-training-data">[appendix:table-training-data]</a> reveals that male data exceeds female data in both total hours and number of samples.

# Human Evaluation for Gender Recognition Tasks

We conduct a human evaluation of speech samples generated by `Parler-TTS` without any style prompts. Participants are asked to listen to these samples and identify whether the speaker was male or female. The purpose of this evaluation is to compare the results with the gender recognition model used in our paper. We limit the classification to male or female categories to align with the characteristics of the selected gender recognition model. We randomly select 100 speech samples from each of the four models: Large-V1, Mini-V1, Mini-V0.1, and Mini-Expresso, all generated without style prompts. This results in a total of 400 speech samples.

We assign three participants and ask them to listen to all 400 samples and classify each as either female or male. The example of human evaluation interface is shown in Figure <a href="#fig:human-evaluation-template" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:human-evaluation-template">[fig:human-evaluation-template]</a>. We pay each participant 18 USD for taking our test. The test usually takes about 1 hour to finish. This includes listening to audio clips twice and reading some text. Therefore, participants earn about 18 USD per hour for their time.

We then compare these human evaluation results with the model’s predictions. In order to analyze the data, we first determine a consensus human evaluation result by taking the mode of the three participants’ responses. We then use Kendall’s $`\tau`$ to compare this consensus with the model’s predictions. The Kendall’s $`\tau`$ between the mode of human evaluations and model predictions is 0.95, with a p-value of 0.0. In addition, we calculate the agreement percentage among the three participants, which is 97.8%. The confusion matrix is presented in the accompanying Table <a href="#appendix:table-human-evaluation-confusiin-matrix" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="appendix:table-human-evaluation-confusiin-matrix">[appendix:table-human-evaluation-confusiin-matrix]</a>. From these results, we observe a high correlation between the model’s predictions and human classifications. This strong agreement suggests that selected model’s gender recognition capabilities closely align with human perception of speaker gender in the generated speech samples.

[^1]: [github.com/kuan2jiu99/GenderBias-TTS-Dataset](https://github.com/kuan2jiu99/GenderBias-TTS-Dataset)

[^2]: In our study, gender specifically refers to biological sex (male or female) due to training datasets. We recognize that gender identity and expression are more complex topics.

[^3]: In this paper, all versions of `GPT-4o` used are `gpt-4o-2024-05-13`.

[^4]: <https://huggingface.co/audeering/wav2vec2-large-robust-24-ft-age-gender>

[^5]: <https://sites.google.com/view/instruction-guided-tts-bias>

[^6]: We use the version `emotion2vec plus large`, and the model link is <https://huggingface.co/emotion2vec/emotion2vec_plus_large>.

[^7]: We use the version `Whisper-large-v3`, and the model link is <https://huggingface.co/openai/whisper-large-v3>

[^8]: <https://pypi.org/project/g2p/>

[^9]: <https://pyphen.org/>

[^10]: <https://huggingface.co/parler-tts>

## References

1. Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia~Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et~al. 2023.
   \newblock Gpt-4 technical report.
   \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774}. [arXiv:2303.08774](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774)
2. R.~Ardila, M.~Branson, K.~Davis, M.~Henretty, M.~Kohler, J.~Meyer, R.~Morais, L.~Saunders, F.~M. Tyers, and G.~Weber. 2020.
   \newblock Common voice: A massively-multilingual speech corpus.
   \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 12th Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2020)}, pages 4211--4215.
3. Alexei Baevski, Yuhao Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli. 2020.
   \newblock wav2vec 2.0: A framework for self-supervised learning of speech representations.
   \newblock \emph{Advances in neural information processing systems}, 33:12449--12460.
4. Hritik Bansal, Da~Yin, Masoud Monajatipoor, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2022.
   \newblock How well can text-to-image generative models understand ethical natural language interventions?
   \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.15230}. [arXiv:2210.15230](https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.15230)
5. Felix Burkhardt, Martin Eckert, Wiebke Johannsen, and Joachim Stegmann. 2010.
   \newblock A database of age and gender annotated telephone speech.
   \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC'10)}.
6. Felix Burkhardt, Johannes Wagner, Hagen Wierstorf, Florian Eyben, and Bj{\"o}rn Schuller. 2023.
   \newblock Speech-based age and gender prediction with transformers.
   \newblock In \emph{Speech Communication; 15th ITG Conference}, pages 46--50. VDE.
7. J~Chung, A~Nagrani, and A~Zisserman. 2018.
   \newblock Voxceleb2: Deep speaker recognition.
   \newblock \emph{Interspeech 2018}.
8. Zhihao Du, Qian Chen, Shiliang Zhang, Kai Hu, Heng Lu, Yexin Yang, Hangrui Hu, Siqi Zheng, Yue Gu, Ziyang Ma, et~al. 2024.
   \newblock Cosyvoice: A scalable multilingual zero-shot text-to-speech synthesizer based on supervised semantic tokens.
   \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.05407}. [arXiv:2407.05407](../2024/2407.05407.md)
9. John~S. Garofolo, Lori~F. Lamel, William~M. Fisher, Jonathan~G. Fiscus, David~S. Pallett, Nancy~L. Dahlgren, and Victor Zue. 1993.
   \newblock \href {https://doi.org/10.35111/17gk-bn40} {Timit acoustic-phonetic continuous speech corpus}.
   \newblock Web Download.
   \newblock LDC93S1, ISBN: 1-58563-019-5.
10. Zhifang Guo, Yichong Leng, Yihan Wu, Sheng Zhao, and Xu~Tan. 2023.
    \newblock Prompttts: Controllable text-to-speech with text descriptions.
    \newblock In \emph{ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 1--5. IEEE.
11. Shengpeng Ji, Jialong Zuo, Minghui Fang, Ziyue Jiang, Feiyang Chen, Xinyu Duan, Baoxing Huai, and Zhou Zhao. 2024.
    \newblock Textrolspeech: A text style control speech corpus with codec language text-to-speech models.
    \newblock In \emph{ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 10301--10305. IEEE.
12. Yuma Koizumi, Heiga Zen, Shigeki Karita, Yifan Ding, Kohei Yatabe, Nobuyuki Morioka, Michiel Bacchiani, Yu~Zhang, Wei Han, and Ankur Bapna. 2023.
    \newblock \href {https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.18802} {{LibriTTS-R}: A restored multi-speaker text-to-speech corpus}.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18802}. [arXiv:2305.18802](../2023/2305.18802.md)
13. Chun-Yi Kuan, Chen-An Li, Tsu-Yuan Hsu, Tse-Yang Lin, Ho-Lam Chung, Kai-Wei Chang, Shuo-Yiin Chang, and Hung-yi Lee. 2023.
    \newblock Towards general-purpose text-instruction-guided voice conversion.
    \newblock In \emph{2023 IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding Workshop (ASRU)}, pages 1--8. IEEE.
14. Yoach Lacombe, Vaibhav Srivastav, and Sanchit Gandhi. 2024.
    \newblock Parler-tts.
    \newblock \url{https://github.com/huggingface/parler-tts}.
15. Yichong Leng, Zhifang Guo, Kai Shen, Xu~Tan, Zeqian Ju, Yanqing Liu, Yufei Liu, Dongchao Yang, Leying Zhang, Kaitao Song, et~al. 2023.
    \newblock Prompttts 2: Describing and generating voices with text prompt.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.02285}. [arXiv:2309.02285](../2023/2309.02285.md)
16. Guanghou Liu, Yongmao Zhang, Yi~Lei, Yunlin Chen, Rui Wang, Zhifei Li, and Lei Xie. 2023.
    \newblock Promptstyle: Controllable style transfer for text-to-speech with natural language descriptions.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.19522}. [arXiv:2305.19522](../2023/2305.19522.md)
17. Dan Lyth and Simon King. 2024.
    \newblock \href {https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.01912} {Natural language guidance of high-fidelity text-to-speech with synthetic annotations}.
    \newblock \emph{Preprint}, arXiv:2402.01912. [arXiv:2402.01912](../2024/2402.01912.md)
18. Ziyang Ma, Zhisheng Zheng, Jiaxin Ye, Jinchao Li, Zhifu Gao, Shiliang Zhang, and Xie Chen. 2023.
    \newblock emotion2vec: Self-supervised pre-training for speech emotion representation.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.15185}. [arXiv:2312.15185](https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.15185)
19. Tu~Anh Nguyen, Wei-Ning Hsu, Antony d'Avirro, Bowen Shi, Itai Gat, Maryam Fazel-Zarani, Tal Remez, Jade Copet, Gabriel Synnaeve, Michael Hassid, et~al. 2023.
    \newblock Expresso: A benchmark and analysis of discrete expressive speech resynthesis.
    \newblock In \emph{INTERSPEECH 2023}, pages 4823--4827. ISCA.
20. Xinlei Niu, Jing Zhang, and Charles~Patrick Martin. 2024.
    \newblock Hybridvc: Efficient voice style conversion with text and audio prompts.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.15637}. [arXiv:2404.15637](../2024/2404.15637.md)
21. Karl Pearson. 1992.
    \newblock \href {https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4612-4380-9_2} {\emph{On the Criterion that a Given System of Deviations from the Probable in the Case of a Correlated System of Variables is Such that it Can be Reasonably Supposed to have Arisen from Random Sampling}}, pages 11--28.
    \newblock Springer New York, New York, NY.
22. Vineel Pratap, Qiantong Xu, Anuroop Sriram, Gabriel Synnaeve, and Ronan Collobert. 2020.
    \newblock Mls: A large-scale multilingual dataset for speech research.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.03411}. [arXiv:2012.03411](https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.03411)
23. Alec Radford, Jong~Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine McLeavey, and Ilya Sutskever. 2023.
    \newblock Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision.
    \newblock In \emph{International conference on machine learning}, pages 28492--28518. PMLR.
24. Reo Shimizu, Ryuichi Yamamoto, Masaya Kawamura, Yuma Shirahata, Hironori Doi, Tatsuya Komatsu, and Kentaro Tachibana. 2024.
    \newblock Prompttts++: Controlling speaker identity in prompt-based text-to-speech using natural language descriptions.
    \newblock In \emph{ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 12672--12676. IEEE.
25. Dongchao Yang, Songxiang Liu, Rongjie Huang, Chao Weng, and Helen Meng. 2024.
    \newblock Instructtts: Modelling expressive tts in discrete latent space with natural language style prompt.
    \newblock \emph{IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing}.
26. Jieyu Zhao, Tianlu Wang, Mark Yatskar, Vicente Ordonez, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2018.
    \newblock Gender bias in coreference resolution: Evaluation and debiasing methods.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers)}, pages 15--20.
