---
arxiv_id: "2503.01710"
title:
  "Spark-TTS: An Efficient LLM-Based Text-to-Speech Model with Single-Stream
  Decoupled Speech Tokens"
authors:
  - Xinsheng Wang et.al.
submitted: "2025-03-03"
categories: []
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.01710
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 50/96
citations_resolved_at: "2026-07-07T16:05:02+00:00"
references_parsed: 96
arxiv_version: ""
---

# Introduction

Recent advances in speech tokenization have revolutionized text-to-speech (TTS) synthesis by bridging the fundamental gap between continuous speech signals and discrete token-based large language models (LLMs) . Through sophisticated quantization techniques, particularly Vector Quantization (VQ)  and Finite Scalar Quantization (FSQ) , codec-based LLMs have emerged as the predominant paradigm for zero-shot TTS. The integration of extensive training data with large-scale model architectures has enabled these systems to achieve unprecedented levels of naturalness, often rendering synthetic speech indistinguishable from human speech .

<figure id="fig:illustration">
<embed src="figures/spark-tts/illustration2.pdf" />
<figcaption>Spark-TTS enables zero-shot voice cloning from reference audio while also generating new speakers through coarse- or fine-grained attribute control. The final waveform is directly reconstructed from the predicted speech tokens using BiCodec’s decoder.</figcaption>
</figure>

Despite the remarkable progress in LLM-based zero-shot TTS, several fundamental challenges persist. Current codec-based TTS architectures exhibit significant complexity, requiring either dual generative models  or intricate parallel multi-stream code prediction mechanisms  that deviate substantially from conventional text LLM frameworks. This divergence stems from inherent limitations in existing audio codecs - while semantic tokens provide compactness, they necessitate additional models for acoustic feature prediction  and lack integrated timbre control capabilities. Acoustic tokens, meanwhile, rely on complex codebook architectures like group-VQ . The field also struggles with the creation of novel voices, as current systems are predominantly limited to reference-based generation , lacking the capability to synthesize voices with precisely specified characteristics. This limitation is further compounded by insufficient granularity in attribute control, especially for fine-grained characteristics such as pitch modulation, despite recent advances in instruction-based generation . Furthermore, the prevalent use of proprietary datasets in current research creates significant challenges for standardized evaluation and meaningful comparison of methods . These limitations collectively underscore the need for a unified approach that can simplify architecture, enable flexible voice creation with comprehensive attribute control, and establish reproducible benchmarks through open data resources.

To address these fundamental limitations, we introduce Spark-TTS, a unified system that achieves zero-shot TTS with comprehensive attribute control through a single codec LLM, maintaining architectural alignment with conventional text LLMs. In addition, we present VoxBox, a meticulously curated and annotated open-source speech dataset that establishes a foundation for reproducible research in speech synthesis. Specifically, we introduce BiCodec, a novel tokenization framework that preserves the efficiency of semantic tokens while enabling fine-grained control over timbre-related attributes. BiCodec achieves this through combining low-bitrate semantic tokens with fixed-length global tokens, effectively capturing both linguistic content and time-invariant acoustic characteristics. Building upon BiCodec, we leverage Qwen2.5  through targeted fine-tuning, seamlessly integrating TTS capabilities within the text LLM paradigm. To enable comprehensive voice control, we implement a hierarchical attribute system combining coarse-grained labels (gender, pitch, speaking speed) with fine-grained numerical values, orchestrated through a chain-of-thought (CoT) prediction framework.

Our primary contributions encompass:

- **New Tokenization**: We present BiCodec, a unified speech tokenization that generates a hybrid token stream combining semantic and global tokens. This approach maintains linguistic fidelity while enabling sophisticated attribute control through LM-based mechanisms.

- **Coarse- and Fine-Grained Voice Control**: Spark-TTS implements a comprehensive attribute control system that seamlessly integrates both categorical and continuous parameters within a text LLM-compatible architecture. As demonstrated in Fig. <a href="#fig:illustration" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:illustration">1</a>, this innovation transcends traditional reference-based approaches to zero-shot TTS.

- **Benchmark Dataset**: We introduce VoxBox, a rigorously curated 100,000-hour speech corpus, developed through systematic data collection, cleaning, and attribute annotation. This resource establishes a standardized benchmark for TTS research and evaluation.

# Related Work

## Single-Stream Speech Tokenizer

Early single-stream speech tokenizers primarily focused on extracting semantic tokens . While pure semantic tokens enable low-bitrate encoding, they necessitate an additional acoustic feature prediction module in semantic token-based speech synthesis .

Recently, single-stream-based acoustic tokenization has gained considerable attention . WavTokenizer  employs a convolution-based decoder to improve reconstruction quality, while X-codec2  enlarges the code space with FSQ. Instead of following a pure encoder-VQ-decoder paradigm, decoupling speech content has proven effective in reducing bitrate using a single codebook .

Among these methods, TiCodec  is the most similar to our approach in handling global information. However, unlike TiCodec, the proposed BiCodec employs semantic tokens as its time-variant tokens. Instead of using group GVQ , we propose a novel global embedding quantization method based on FSQ with learnable queries and a cross-attention mechanism. This approach enables the generation of a relatively longer token sequence, offering a more expressive and flexible representation.

## LLM-based Zero-Shot TTS

Prevalent codec LLMs zero-shot TTS predominantly fall into two categories. The first type involves predicting single-stream codes using LLMs, followed by the generation of codes enriched with detailed acoustic or continuous semantic features through another LLM  or generative diffusion models . The second type involves predicting multi-stream codes using carefully designed parallel strategies  or masked generative patterns .

By leveraging the single-stream tokens produced by the proposed BiCodec, Spark-TTS simplifies the modeling of speech tokens within an LLM framework that is fully unified with text LLMs. The most comparable work is the concurrent TTS model Llasa , which employs an FSQ-based tokenizer to encode speech into single-stream codes with a codebook size of 65,536, followed by LLaMA  for speech token prediction. In contrast, Spark-TTS extends beyond zero-shot TTS by integrating speaker attribute labels, enabling controllable voice creation. Additionally, Spark-TTS achieves higher zero-shot TTS performance while using fewer model parameters, enhancing both efficiency and flexibility.

# BiCodec

<figure id="fig:bicodec" data-latex-placement="tp">
<embed src="figures/spark-tts/Bicodec_overview3.pdf" style="width:95.0%" />
<figcaption>Illustration of the BiCodec. The Global Tokenizer processes the Mel spectrogram to produce global tokens with fixed length, while the Semantic Tokenizer adopts features from wav2vec 2.0 to produce 50 TPS semantic tokens. The decoder reconstructs the waveform from the generated tokens. The detailed structure of BiCodec is provided in Appendix <a href="#append:bicodec" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="append:bicodec">8</a>.</figcaption>
</figure>

To achieve both the compact nature and semantic relevance of semantic tokens, while also enabling acoustic attribute control within an LM, we propose BiCodec, which discretizes input audio into: (i) Semantic tokens at 50 tokens per second (TPS), capturing linguistic content, and (ii) Fixed-length global tokens, encoding speaker attributes and other global speech characteristics.

## Overview

As shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:bicodec" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:bicodec">2</a>, BiCodec includes a Global Tokenizer and a Semantic Tokenizer. The former extracts global tokens from the Mel spectrogram of input audio. The latter uses features from wav2vec 2.0  as input to extract semantic tokens.

The BiCodec architecture follows a standard VQ-VAE encoder-decoder framework, augmented with a global tokenizer. The decoder reconstructs discrete tokens back into audio. For an input audio signal $`\bm{x} \in {[-1, 1]}^T`$, with sample number of $`T`$, BiCodec functions as follows:

```math
\begin{equation}
\begin{aligned}
    & \bm{z}    = E_s(F(\bm{x})),  \bm{g} = E_g(\text{Mel}(\bm{x})), \\
    & \bm{g}_f  = \text{CrossAttention}(\bm{g}, \bm{h}), \\
    & \bm{z}_q  = Q_s(\bm{z}),  \bm{g}_q = Q_g(\bm{g}_f), \\
    & \bm{\hat{x}}  = G(\bm{z}_q, A_g(\bm{g}_q)),
\end{aligned}
\end{equation}
```

where $`E_s(\cdot)`$ is the encoder of the semantic tokenizer, $`F(\cdot)`$ is the pre-trained wav2vec 2.0[^3], $`E_g(\cdot)`$ is the encoder of the global tokenizer, $`\text{Mel}(\cdot)`$ is to extract Mel spectrogram from $`\bm{x}`$, $`\bm{h}`$ is a sequence of learnable queries matching the length of the final global token sequence, $`Q_s(\cdot)`$ is a quantization layer with VQ, $`Q_g(\cdot)`$ is a quantization layer with FSQ, $`A_g(\cdot)`$ is an aggregation module with a pooling layer, and $`G(\cdot)`$ is the decoder that reconstructs the time-domain signal $`\bm{\hat{x}}`$.

## Model Structure

<figure id="fig:llm" data-latex-placement="htp">
<embed src="figures/spark-tts/spark-tts-lm.pdf" style="width:90.0%" />
<figcaption>Speech language model of Spark-TTS. During inference, if the input contains attribute tokens representing gender, pitch level, and speed level, the model can predict the corresponding fine-grained attribute tokens, global tokens, and semantic tokens without requiring reference audio in a CoT manner. Otherwise, global tokens can be derived from the reference audio for zero-shot TTS.</figcaption>
</figure>

**Encoder and Decoder** The encoder of the semantic tokenizer $`E_s`$ and the decoder $`G`$ are fully convolutional neural networks built with ConvNeXt  blocks. To effectively capture semantic information, based on the relationship between different layer features of wav2vec 2.0 (XLSR-53) and semantics , we select features from the 11th, 14th, and 16th layers, averaging them to obtain the semantic feature, which serves as the input for the semantic tokenizer. The features from the first two layers show a strong correlation with words, while the features from the 16th layer exhibit the strongest correlation with phonemes.

The global tokenizer’s encoder, $`E_g`$, uses the ECAPA-TDNN architecture  following the implementation by Wespeaker  up to the final pooling layer. After encoding, the global tokenizer extracts a fixed-length sequence representation $`\bm{g}_f`$ using a cross-attention mechanism with a set of learnable queries.

**Quantization** The semantic tokenizer employs single-codebook vector quantization for quantization. Inspired by DAC , we use factorized codes to project the encoder’s output into a low-dimensional latent variable space prior to quantization.

Considering that the global tokenizer requires a set of discrete tokens to represent time-independent global information, FSQ is employed rather than VQ to mitigate the potential risk of training collapse associated with VQ. Details about the model structure can be seen in Appendix <a href="#append:bicodec" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="append:bicodec">8</a>.

## Training objective

**Loss Functions** BiCodec is trained end-to-end employing a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) methodology  to minimize reconstruction loss, together with L1 feature matching loss (via discriminators)   while simultaneously optimizing the VQ codebook.

Following , we compute the frequency domain reconstruction loss using L1 loss on multi-scale mel-spectrograms. Multi-period discriminator  and multi-band multi-scale STFT discriminator  are used for waveform discrimination and frequency domain discrimination, respectively.

VQ codebook learning incorporates both a codebook loss and a commitment loss. Following the approach in , the codebook loss is calculated as the L1 loss between the encoder output and the quantized results, employing stop-gradients. Additionally, the straight-through estimator  is used to enable the backpropagation of gradients.

To ensure training stability, in the initial stages, the global embedding derived from the averaged $`\bm{g}_q`$ is not integrated into the decoder. Instead, this embedding is obtained directly from the pooling of $`\bm{g}_f`$. Meanwhile, the FSQ codebook is updated using an L1 loss between embedding obtained from $`\bm{g}_f`$ and that from $`\text{pool}(\bm{g}_q)`$. As training progresses and stabilizes, this teacher-student form will be omitted after a specific training step.

To further ensure semantic relevance, following X-Codec , a wav2vec 2.0 reconstruction loss is applied after quantization, with ConvNeXt-based blocks serving as the predictor.

# Language Modeling of Spark-TTS

## Overview

As illustrated in Fig. <a href="#fig:llm" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:llm">3</a>, the Spark-TTS speech language model adopts a decoder-only transformer architecture, unified with a typical textual language model. We employ the pre-trained textual LLM Qwen2.5-0.5B[^4]  as the backbone of the speech language model. Unlike CosyVoice2 , Spark-TTS does not require flow matching to generate acoustic features. Instead, BiCodec’s decoder directly processes the LM’s output to produce the final audio, significantly simplifying the textual LLM-based speech generation pipeline.

In addition to zero-shot TTS, Spark-TTS supports voice creation using various attribute labels. During inference, if attribute labels for gender, pitch level, and speed level are provided, the language model can predict fine-grained pitch values, speed values, global tokens, and semantic tokens through a chain-of-thought (CoT) manner. If no attribute labels are provided, global tokens are extracted from the reference audio, enabling zero-shot TTS.

## Tokenizer

**Text Tokenizer** Similar to textual LLMs, Spark-TTS employs a byte pair encoding (BPE)-based tokenizer to process raw text. Here, we adopt the Qwen2.5 tokenizer , which supports multiple languages.

**Attribute Tokenizer** To enable voice creation based on speech attributes, Spark-TTS encodes attribute information at two levels: (i) _Coarse-Grained_: Attribute labels representing high-level speech characteristics, including gender, pitch (categorized into five discrete levels), and speed (categorized into five discrete levels); (ii) _Fine-Grained_: Attribute values enabling precise control over pitch and speed, which are quantized by rounding to the nearest integer during tokenization.

**Speech Tokenizer** The speech tokenizer consists of a global tokenizer and a semantic tokenizer. Using both global and semantic tokens, the BiCodec decoder reconstructs the waveform signal.

## Training Objective

The decoder-only language model is trained by minimizing the negative log-likelihood of token predictions. Let $`\mathcal{T}`$ represent the tokenized textual prompt and $`\mathcal{G}`$ denote the global speech token prompt; the optimization for zero-shot TTS is defined as follows:

```math
\begin{equation}
    \mathcal{L}_{zst} = -\sum_{t=1}^{T_o} \log P(o_t | \mathcal{T}, \mathcal{G}, \bm{o}_{<t}; \theta_{LM}),
\end{equation}
```

where $`\bm{o} \in  \mathbb{N}^T_o`$ represents the semantic tokens to be predicted in the zero-shot TTS scenario, and $`\theta_{LM}`$ denotes the parameters of the language model.

For the case of voice creation, the optimization is defined as follows:

```math
\begin{equation}
    \mathcal{L}_{control} = -\sum_{t=1}^{T_c} \log P(c_t | \mathcal{T}, \mathcal{A}, \bm{c}_{<t}; \theta_{LM}),
\end{equation}
```

where $`\mathcal{A}`$ represents the attribute label prompt, and the output $`\bm{c}`$ encompasses $`\mathcal{F}`$, $`\mathcal{G}`$, and $`\mathcal{S}`$. Here, $`\mathcal{F}`$ denotes the fine-grained attribute value prompt, and $`\mathcal{S}`$ is speech semantic tokens.

In practice, $`\mathcal{L}_{zst}`$ and $`\mathcal{L}_{control}`$ are mixed during training. Specifically, each audio example is structured into two training samples according to $`\mathcal{L}_{zst}`$ and $`\mathcal{L}_{control}`$ respectively.

# VoxBox

## Overview

To facilitate voice creation and establish a fair comparison benchmark for future research, we introduce VoxBox, a well-annotated dataset for both English and Chinese. All data sources in VoxBox originate from open-source datasets, ensuring broad accessibility. To enhance data diversity, we collect not only common TTS datasets, but also datasets used for speech emotion recognition. Each audio file in VoxBox is annotated with gender, pitch, and speed. Additionally, we also perform data cleaning on datasets with lower text quality. After data cleaning, VoxBox comprises 4.7 million audio files, sourced from 29 open datasets, totaling 102.5k hours of speech data. Details about VoxBox and the source datasets can be found in Appendix <a href="#ap.sec:voxbox" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="ap.sec:voxbox">12</a>.

## Clean and Annotation

**Gender Annotation** Given the strong performance of pre-trained WavLM in speaker-related tasks , we fine-tune the WavLM-large model for gender classification using datasets that contain explicit gender labels (detailed in Appendix <a href="#sc:gender_data_ap" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sc:gender_data_ap">12.2</a>). Our fine-tuned model achieves 99.4% accuracy on the AISHELL-3 test set. We then use this gender classification model to annotate datasets previously lacking gender labels.

**Pitch Annotation** We extract the average pitch value from each audio clip using PyWorld[^5], rounding it to the nearest integer to obtain fine-grained pitch value tokens. For the definition of pitch levels, we first convert the average pitch of each audio clip to the Mel scale. We then conduct a statistical analysis of all Mel scale pitch for all males and females separately. Based on the 5th, 20th, 70th, and 90th percentiles, we establish boundaries for five pitch levels: very low, low, moderate, high, and very high (detailed in Appendix <a href="#ap.sec.pitch_class" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="ap.sec.pitch_class">12.1</a>).

**Speed Annotation** Compared to character-based , word-based , or phoneme-based  speaking rate calculations, syllable-based measurements provide a more direct correlation with speaking rate. Here, we initially apply Voice Activity Detection (VAD) to eliminate silent segments at both ends. Subsequently, we calculate the syllables per second (SPS), which is then rounded to the nearest integer to serve as the fine-grained speed value token. Using the 5th, 20th, 80th, and 95th percentiles, we establish boundaries for five distinct speed levels: very slow, slow, moderate, fast, and very fast (detailed in Appendix <a href="#ap.sec.pitch_class" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="ap.sec.pitch_class">12.1</a>).

**Data Cleaning** For datasets exhibiting lower text quality, we conduct an additional cleaning process. Specifically, for Emilia , the original transcripts were obtained using the Whisper-based (ASR) system , employing the whisper-medium model, which occasionally resulted in inaccuracies. To address this, we employ another ASR model, FunASR [^6], to re-recognize the audio. We then use the original scripts as ground truth to calculate the Word Error Rate (WER) and excluded samples with a WER exceeding 0.05. For the MLS-English, LibriSpeech, LibriTTS-R, and datasets originally designed for emotion recognition, we employ the whisper-large-v3[^7] model for speech recognition, comparing the recognition results with the original scripts. Samples exhibiting insertions or deletions are excluded from the dataset.

# Experiments

## Implementation Details

BiCodec is trained on the full training set of the LibriSpeech dataset, comprising 960 hours of English speech data. Additionally, we include 1,000 hours of speech data from both Emilia-CN and Emilia-EN, bringing the total training data to approximately 3,000 hours. All audio samples are resampled to 16 kHz. The global token length is set as 32. For optimization, we use the AdamW optimizer with moving average coefficients coefficients $`\beta_1 = 0.8`$ and $`\beta_2 = 0.9`$. The model converges within approximately 800k training steps using a batch size with 614.4 seconds of speech.

The Spark-TTS language model is trained using the entire VoxBox training set. If a dataset lacks predefined train/test splits, we use the entire processed dataset for training. The training employs the AdamW optimizer with $`\beta_1 = 0.9`$ and $`\beta_2 = 0.96`$. The model undergoes training over 3 epochs, using a batch size of 768 samples.

## Reconstruction Performance of BiCodec

<div class="table*">

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th style="text-align: left;">Model</th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Codebook</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Size</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table></th>
<th style="text-align: center;">Nq</th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Token Rate</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">(TPS)</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table></th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Bandwidth</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">(bps)</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table></th>
<th style="text-align: center;">STOI<span class="math inline">↑</span></th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">PESQ</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">NB<span class="math inline">↑</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table></th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">PESQ</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">WB<span class="math inline">↑</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table></th>
<th style="text-align: center;">UTMOS<span class="math inline">↑</span></th>
<th style="text-align: center;">SIM<span class="math inline">↑</span></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Encodec</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1024</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">8</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">600</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6000</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.94</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.17</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.75</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.07</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.89</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">DAC</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1024</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">12</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">600</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6000</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.95</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>4.15</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>4.01</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.00</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.98</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Encodec</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1024</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">150</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1500</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.84</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.94</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.56</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.58</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Mimi</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2048</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">8</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">100</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1100</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.91</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.8</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.25</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.56</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.73</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">BigCodec</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">8192</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">80</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1040</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.94</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.27</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.68</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.11</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.84</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">DAC</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1024</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">100</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1000</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.73</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.4</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.14</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.29</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.32</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">SpeechTokenizer</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1024</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">100</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1000</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.77</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.59</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.25</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.28</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.36</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">X-codec</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1024</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">100</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1000</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.86</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.88</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.33</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.21</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.72</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">WavTokenizer</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4096</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">75</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">900</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.89</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.64</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.14</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.94</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.67</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">X-codec2</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">65536</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">50</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">800</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.92</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.04</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.43</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.13</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.82</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">StableCodec</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">15625</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">50</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">697</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.91</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.91</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.24</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>4.23</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.62</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Single-Codec</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">8192</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">23.4</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">304</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.86</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.42</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.88</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.72</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.60</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">BiCodec</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">8192</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">50</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">650</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.92</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>3.13</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>2.51</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.18</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.80</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="tab:codec_compare" label="tab:codec_compare"></span>

</div>

**Comparsion with Other Methods** The reconstruction performance of BiCodec compared to other methods is presented in Table <a href="#tab:codec_compare" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:codec_compare">[tab:codec_compare]</a>. As can be seen, within the low-bitrate range (\<1 kbps), BiCodec surpasses all methods on most metrics, except for UTMOS, where it ranks second to StableCodec, and SIM, where it ranks second to X-Codec2, thereby achieving a new state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance.

Notably, BiCodec’s semantic tokens are extracted from wav2vec 2.0 rather than raw audio, resulting in stronger semantic alignment compared to codecs that directly process waveform-based representations. Further experimental results and analyses are provided in Appendix <a href="#sc:codec_exp_append" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sc:codec_exp_append">8.3</a>.

**Effectiveness of Global Tokenizer** We first evaluate the optimal length for the global token sequence. As shown in Table <a href="#tab:global_length" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:global_length">4</a>, we compare the impact of different sequence lengths on reconstruction quality. The results without FSQ quantization serve as a benchmark reference. Notably, increasing the global token sequence length consistently improves reconstruction quality, with performance approaching the benchmark at the length of 32.

Furthermore, Table <a href="#tab:global_length" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:global_length">4</a> compares our proposed quantization method—which incorporates learnable queries and FSQ—against the GVQ-based method introduced by Ren et al.  for time-invariant codes. Our approach demonstrates a substantial performance improvement over the GVQ-based method, highlighting the effectiveness of FSQ with learnable queries in enhancing global token representation.

<div id="tab:global_length">

<table>
<caption>Performance of BiCodec with varying global token lengths for reconstruction on the LibriSpeech test-clean dataset, where "w/o" indicates the omission of FSQ-based quantization, and gvq-32 means the global tokenizer is implemented with group VQ. For performance results on the LibriTTS test-clean dataset, refer to Appendix <a href="#sc:codec_exp_append" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sc:codec_exp_append">8.3</a>.</caption>
<thead>
<tr>
<th style="text-align: center;"><div id="tab:global_length">
<table>
<caption>Performance of BiCodec with varying global token lengths for reconstruction on the LibriSpeech test-clean dataset, where "w/o" indicates the omission of FSQ-based quantization, and gvq-32 means the global tokenizer is implemented with group VQ. For performance results on the LibriTTS test-clean dataset, refer to Appendix <a href="#sc:codec_exp_append" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sc:codec_exp_append">8.3</a>.</caption>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Global</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Token</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div></th>
<th style="text-align: center;">STOI<span class="math inline">↑</span></th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><div id="tab:global_length">
<table>
<caption>Performance of BiCodec with varying global token lengths for reconstruction on the LibriSpeech test-clean dataset, where "w/o" indicates the omission of FSQ-based quantization, and gvq-32 means the global tokenizer is implemented with group VQ. For performance results on the LibriTTS test-clean dataset, refer to Appendix <a href="#sc:codec_exp_append" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sc:codec_exp_append">8.3</a>.</caption>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">PESQ</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">NB<span class="math inline">↑</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div></th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><div id="tab:global_length">
<table>
<caption>Performance of BiCodec with varying global token lengths for reconstruction on the LibriSpeech test-clean dataset, where "w/o" indicates the omission of FSQ-based quantization, and gvq-32 means the global tokenizer is implemented with group VQ. For performance results on the LibriTTS test-clean dataset, refer to Appendix <a href="#sc:codec_exp_append" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sc:codec_exp_append">8.3</a>.</caption>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">PESQ</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">WB<span class="math inline">↑</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div></th>
<th style="text-align: center;">UTMOS<span class="math inline">↑</span></th>
<th style="text-align: center;">SIM<span class="math inline">↑</span></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">w/o FSQ</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.915</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>3.14</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>2.52</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.15</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.83</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">gvq-32</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.912</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.91</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.30</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.06</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.74</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">8</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.916</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.04</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.41</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.16</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.74</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">16</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.919</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.08</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.45</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.15</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.77</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">32</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.922</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.13</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.51</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>4.18</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.80</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span id="tab:global_length" label="tab:global_length"></span>

## Control Capabilities of Spark-TTS

Spark-TTS enables controllable generation by inputting attribute labels or fine-grained attribute values. In label-based control, the model automatically generates the corresponding attribute values (e.g., pitch and speed). However, when these values are manually specified, the system switches to fine-grained control.

**Gender** To assess Spark-TTS’s capability in gender control, we compare it with textual prompt-based controllable TTS models, including VoxInstruct and Parler-TTS. For evaluation, we reorganize the test prompts of real speech from PromptTTS  based on the prompt structures used in VoxInstruct and Parler-TTS. The gender accuracy (Acc) of the generated speech is measured using our gender predictor, which is specifically trained for gender annotation. The results, presented in Table <a href="#table:gender_control" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:gender_control">5</a>, show that Spark-TTS significantly outperforms other controllable TTS systems in gender control, demonstrating its strong capability in attribute-based voice generation.

<div id="table:gender_control">

| Method              | VoxInstruct | Parler-tts | Spark-TTS |
| :------------------ | :---------: | :--------: | :-------: |
| Acc (%)$`\uparrow`$ |    82.99    |   98.12    | **99.77** |

Gender control performance of various models.

</div>

<span id="table:gender_control" label="table:gender_control"></span>

**Pitch and Speed** Spark-TTS enables controllable generation by inputting attribute labels or fine-grained attribute values. In label-based control, the model automatically generates the corresponding attribute values (e.g., pitch and speed). However, when these values are manually specified, the system switches to fine-grained control. Fig. <a href="#fig:control_matrix" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:control_matrix">4</a> illustrates the control confusion matrices for pitch and speaking rate based on coarse-grained labels, while Fig. <a href="#fig:control_value" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:control_value">5</a> presents the fine-grained control performance for pitch and speed. As shown, Spark-TTS accurately generates speech that aligns with the specified attribute labels, demonstrating precise control over both coarse-grained and fine-grained attributes.

## Zero-shot TTS Performance

To evaluate Spark-TTS’s zero-shot TTS capability, we assess its performance on Seed-TTS-eval and compare it with existing zero-shot TTS models. The results are presented in Table <a href="#tab:zst_tts" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:zst_tts">6</a>, where speech intelligibility is evaluated using the Character Error Rate (CER) for Chinese and the WER for English, following the Seed-TTS-eval[^8]. As can been seen, Spark-TTS demonstrates significant superiority in intelligibility for zero-shot TTS scenarios. On test-zh, Spark-TTS achieves a CER second only to the closed-source model Seed-TTS, while it ranks second only to F5-TTS  for English WER. This high intelligibility is partly attributed to the semantic feature-based BiCodec and further validates the high quality of our VoxBox dataset in terms of transcripts. In terms of speaker similarity, while Spark-TTS is relatively weaker than multi-stage or NAR-based methods, it significantly outperforms the single-stage model Llasa . Notably, Spark-TTS, with just 0.5B model parameters and 100k hours of training data, surpasses Llasa, which has 8B parameters and is trained on 250k hours of data.

<figure id="fig:control_matrix" data-latex-placement="tbp">
<p><br />
<br />
</p>
<figcaption>Confusion matrix of coarse-grained pitch and speed control results. In pitch-controllable generation, each label’s generated samples consist of 50 Chinese and 50 English samples. In speed-controllable generation, each label’s generated samples consist of 50 male and 50 female samples. </figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:control_value" data-latex-placement="H">
<p><br />
<br />
</p>
<figcaption>Fine-grained pitch and speed control results. For pitch-controllable generation, each generated value includes one Chinese sample and one English sample. For speed-controllable generation, each generated value includes 10 male samples and 10 female samples.</figcaption>
</figure>

Following CosyVoice2 , we evaluate the quality of the generated speech on the LibriSpeech test-clean set. As shown in Table <a href="#tb:tts_utmos" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tb:tts_utmos">7</a>, our method produces audio of significantly higher quality than the original and outperforms CosyVoice2, the SOTA open-source TTS model with multi-stage modeling. This demonstrates the strong performance of Spark-TTS in terms of speech quality.

<div id="tab:zst_tts">

<table>
<caption>Results of Spark-TTS and recent TTS models on the Seed test sets (test-zh for Chinese and test-en for English). † denotes closed-sourced models.</caption>
<thead>
<tr>
<th style="text-align: left;">Model</th>
<th colspan="2" style="text-align: center;">test-zh</th>
<th colspan="2" style="text-align: center;">test-en</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"><span>2-5</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">CER<span class="math inline">↓</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">SIM<span class="math inline">↑</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">WER<span class="math inline">↓</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">SIM<span class="math inline">↑</span></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align: center;">Multi-Stage or NAR Methods</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Seed-TTS<sup>†</sup></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>1.12</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.796</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.25</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.762</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">FireRedTTS</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.51</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.635</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.82</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.460</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">MaskGCT</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.27</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.774</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.62</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.714</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">E2 TTS (32 NFE)<sup>†</sup></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.97</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.730</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.19</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.710</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">F5-TTS (32 NFE)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.56</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.741</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>1.83</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.647</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">CosyVoice</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.63</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.723</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.29</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.609</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">CosyVoice2</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.45</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.748</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.57</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.652</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align: center;">One-Stage AR Methods</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Llasa-1B-250k</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.89</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.669</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.22</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.572</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Llasa-3B-250k</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.60</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.675</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.14</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.579</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Llasa-8B-250k</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.59</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.684</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.97</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.574</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Spark-TTS</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>1.20</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.672</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>1.98</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.584</strong></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span id="tab:zst_tts" label="tab:zst_tts"></span>

<div id="tb:tts_utmos">

| Method            |  GT  | CosyVoice | CosyVoice2 | Spark-TTS |
| :---------------- | :--: | :-------: | :--------: | :-------: |
| UTMOS$`\uparrow`$ | 4.08 |   4.09    |    4.23    | **4.35**  |

Quality comparison of zero-shot TTS audio generation on the LibriSpeech test-clean set. GT represents ground truth.

</div>

<span id="tb:tts_utmos" label="tb:tts_utmos"></span>

# Conclusion

This paper introduces BiCodec, which retains the advantages of semantic tokens, including high compression efficiency and high intelligibility, while addressing the limitation of traditional semantic tokens, which cannot control timbre-related attributes within an LM, by incorporating global tokens. BiCodec achieves a new SOTA reconstruction quality, operating at 50 TPS with a bit rate of 0.65 kbps, surpassing other codecs within the sub-1 kbps range. Building on BiCodec, we develop Spark-TTS, a text-to-speech model that integrates the textual language model Qwen2.5. Spark-TTS enables voice generation based on specified attributes and supports zero-shot synthesis. To our knowledge, this is the first TTS model to offer fine-grained control over both pitch and speaking rate, while simultaneously supporting zero-shot TTS. Additionally, to facilitate comparative research, we introduce VoxBox, an open-source dataset designed for controllable speech synthesis. VoxBox not only filters out low-quality textual data but also provides comprehensive annotations, including gender, pitch, and speaking rate, significantly enhancing training for controlled generation tasks.

# Limitation

Despite its advantages, Spark-TTS also has notable limitations. Similar to Llasa , which relies on a single codebook and a textual language model, Spark-TTS exhibits relatively lower speaker similarity metrics in zero-shot TTS compared to multi-stage or NAR methods. This may be due to the greater speaker variability introduced by the AR language model during inference. Currently, Spark-TTS does not impose additional disentanglement constraints between global tokens and semantic tokens. In future work, we aim to enhance global token control over timbre by introducing perturbations to formants or pitch in the semantic token input. This approach will promote better disentanglement of timbre information, allowing BiCodec’s decoder to exert absolute control over timbre. By doing so, we aim to reduce randomness introduced by the AR model, improving the speaker similarity in zero-shot synthesis.

# BiCodec

<figure id="fig:bicodec model struture" data-latex-placement="htp">
<embed src="figures/spark-tts/Bicodec_Framework.pdf" style="width:95.0%" />
<figcaption>Model Structure of BiCodec</figcaption>
</figure>

The model structure of BiCodec is illustrated in Fig. <a href="#fig:bicodec model struture" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:bicodec model struture">6</a>. BiCodec primarily consists of three components:

- Semantic Tokenizer

- Global Tokenizer

- Decoder

Additionally, to compute the feature loss with the input wav2vec 2.0 features, an extra ConvNeXt block is incorporated to predict wav2vec 2.0 features, to further ensure the semantic relevance.

## Model Configurations

The semantic tokenizer consists of 12 ConvNeXt blocks and 2 downsampling blocks. The downsampling blacks is only for semantic codes with lower than 50 TPS. The codebook size of VQ is 8192. The ECAPA-TDNN in the global tokenizer features an embedding dimension of 512. Meanwhile, the vector number of the learnable queries in the global tokenizer equal to the final goal token sequence length. For the FSQ module, the FSQ dimension is set to 6, with each dimension having 4 levels, resulting in a codebook size of 4096.

The upsampling rates in the Transposed Convolution Blocks are set to \[8, 5, 4, 2\] for 16 kHz sampled audio and \[8, 5, 4, 3\] for 24 kHz sampled audio. The reconstruction performance of BiCodec with 24 kHz sampled audio is presented in Table <a href="#tab:codec_other_data" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:codec_other_data">[tab:codec_other_data]</a>.

## Compared Methods

- **Encodec** : An RVQ-based codec designed for universal audio compression.

- **DAC** : An RVQ-based codec for universal audio.

- **Mimi** : An RVQ-based codec with semantic constraint for speech.

- **Single-Codec** : A single-stream Mel codec that incorporates speaker embeddings. The reconstruction results for this method are provided by the authors.

- **BigCodec** : A VQ-based single-stream codec for speech.

- **SpeechTokenizer** : An RVQ-based codec with semantic distillation for speech.

- **X-codec** : An RVQ-based codec with semantic distillation for speech.

- **X-codec2** : A FSQ-based single-stream codec with semantic distillation for speech.

- **StableCodec** : A residual FSQ-based tokenizer for speech.

- **WavTokenizer** : A single VQ codebook-based tokenizer for universal audio.

## Additional Experiment

To evaluate the performance of BiCodec at lower bitrates, we apply a downsampling operation in the semantic encoder, reducing the semantic token rate to 25 TPS. We compare BiCodec with Single-Codec , which operates at a similar bitrate, on the LibriSpeech test-clean and LibriTTS test-clean datasets. The results are presented in Table <a href="#tab:lower_bit" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:lower_bit">[tab:lower_bit]</a> and Table <a href="#tab:lower_bit_libritts" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:lower_bit_libritts">[tab:lower_bit_libritts]</a>.

<div class="table*">

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th style="text-align: left;">Model</th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Codebook</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Size</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table></th>
<th style="text-align: center;">Nq</th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Token</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Rate</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table></th>
<th style="text-align: center;">Bandwidth</th>
<th style="text-align: center;">STOI<span class="math inline">↑</span></th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">PESQ</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">NB<span class="math inline">↑</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table></th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">PESQ</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">WB<span class="math inline">↑</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table></th>
<th style="text-align: center;">UTMOS<span class="math inline">↑</span></th>
<th style="text-align: center;">SIM<span class="math inline">↑</span></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Single-Codec</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">8192</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">23.4</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">304</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.86</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.42</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.88</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.72</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.60</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">BiCodec-4096-25</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4096</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">25</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">300</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.88</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.53</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.97</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.00</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.70</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">BiCodec-8192-25</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">8192</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">25</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">325</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.89</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.62</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.05</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.13</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.71</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">BiCodec-4096-50</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4096</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">50</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">600</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.92</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.03</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.42</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.17</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.78</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="tab:lower_bit" label="tab:lower_bit"></span>

</div>

<div class="table*">

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th style="text-align: left;"><table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Codebook</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Size</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table></th>
<th style="text-align: center;">Nq</th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Token</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Rate</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table></th>
<th style="text-align: center;">Bandwidth</th>
<th style="text-align: center;">STOI<span class="math inline">↑</span></th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">PESQ</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">NB<span class="math inline">↑</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table></th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">PESQ</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">WB<span class="math inline">↑</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table></th>
<th style="text-align: center;">UTMOS<span class="math inline">↑</span></th>
<th style="text-align: left;">SIM<span class="math inline">↑</span></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">4096</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">25</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">300</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.88</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.47</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.91</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.88</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">0.67</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">8192</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">25</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">325</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.88</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.56</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.98</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.02</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">0.68</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">4096</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">50</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">600</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.91</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.96</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.36</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.10</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">0.75</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">8192</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">50</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">650</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.92</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>3.08</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>2.46</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>4.11</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><strong>0.78</strong></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="tab:lower_bit_libritts" label="tab:lower_bit_libritts"></span>

</div>

**Global Token Length** The reconstruction performance of BiCodec with varying global token lengths on the LibriTTS test-clean dataset is presented in Table <a href="#tab:glength_libritts" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:glength_libritts">11</a>.

<div id="tab:glength_libritts">

<table>
<caption>Performance of BiCodec with varying global token lengths for reconstruction on the LibriTTS test-clean dataset, where "w/o" indicates the omission of FSQ-based quantization, and gvq-32 means the global tokenizer is implemented with group VQ.</caption>
<thead>
<tr>
<th style="text-align: center;"><div id="tab:glength_libritts">
<table>
<caption>Performance of BiCodec with varying global token lengths for reconstruction on the LibriTTS test-clean dataset, where "w/o" indicates the omission of FSQ-based quantization, and gvq-32 means the global tokenizer is implemented with group VQ.</caption>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Global</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Token</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div></th>
<th style="text-align: center;">STOI<span class="math inline">↑</span></th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><div id="tab:glength_libritts">
<table>
<caption>Performance of BiCodec with varying global token lengths for reconstruction on the LibriTTS test-clean dataset, where "w/o" indicates the omission of FSQ-based quantization, and gvq-32 means the global tokenizer is implemented with group VQ.</caption>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">PESQ</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">NB<span class="math inline">↑</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div></th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><div id="tab:glength_libritts">
<table>
<caption>Performance of BiCodec with varying global token lengths for reconstruction on the LibriTTS test-clean dataset, where "w/o" indicates the omission of FSQ-based quantization, and gvq-32 means the global tokenizer is implemented with group VQ.</caption>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">PESQ</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">WB<span class="math inline">↑</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div></th>
<th style="text-align: center;">UTMOS<span class="math inline">↑</span></th>
<th style="text-align: left;">SIM<span class="math inline">↑</span></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">w/o</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.923</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>3.1</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>2.48</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.09</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.81</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">gvq-32</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.913</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.91</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.30</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.06</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.71</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">8</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.916</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.97</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.34</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.10</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.72</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">16</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.918</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.03</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.40</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.08</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.74</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">32</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.921</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>3.08</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>2.46</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>4.11</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.78</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span id="tab:glength_libritts" label="tab:glength_libritts"></span>

**Performance on Other Datasets** To evaluate the generalization ability of BiCodec, we conducted experiments on a broader range of diverse datasets. The results are presented in Table <a href="#tab:codec_other_data" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:codec_other_data">[tab:codec_other_data]</a>.

<div class="table*">

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th style="text-align: left;">Data</th>
<th style="text-align: center;">Method</th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Codebook</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Size</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table></th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Traing</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Data</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table></th>
<th style="text-align: center;">STOI<span class="math inline">↑</span></th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">PESQ</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">NB<span class="math inline">↑</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table></th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">PESQ</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">WB<span class="math inline">↑</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table></th>
<th style="text-align: center;">UTMOS<span class="math inline">↑</span></th>
<th style="text-align: center;">SIM<span class="math inline">↑</span></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td rowspan="3" style="text-align: left;">Data-P</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">X-codec2</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">65536</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">150k</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.89</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.69</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.10</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.16</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.73</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">BiCodec</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">8192</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3k</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.90</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>2.80</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>2.22</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>3.22</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.78</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">BiCodec-24k</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">8192</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">20k</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.90</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>2.80</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.19</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.20</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.78</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="3" style="text-align: left;">Data-S</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">X-codec2</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">65536</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">150k</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.92</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.81</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.30</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.16</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.69</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">BiCodec</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">8192</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3k</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.93</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>3.04</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>2.50</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>3.28</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.82</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">BiCodec-24k</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">8192</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">20k</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.93</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.00</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.44</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.24</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.82</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="3" style="text-align: left;">Data-M</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">X-codec2</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">65536</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">150k</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.84</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.43</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.87</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.17</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.75</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">BiCodec</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">8192</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3k</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.85</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.56</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>1.91</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.17</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.76</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">BiCodec-24k</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">8192</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">20k</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.85</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>2.57</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>1.91</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>2.28</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.76</strong></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="tab:codec_other_data" label="tab:codec_other_data"></span>

</div>

# Inference of Spark-TTS

**Zero-shot TTS** There are two inference strategies for zero-shot TTS:

- Using the text to be synthesized along with the global tokens from a reference audio as the prompt to generate speech, e.g., \[\<_content text_\> \<_global token_\> $`\rightarrow`$ \<_semantic token_\>\].

- Incorporating both the transcript and semantic tokens of the reference audio as a prefix in the prompt, e.g., \[\<_content text_\> \<_reference text_\> \<_global token_\> \<_semantic token of reference_\> $`\rightarrow`$ \<_semantic token_\>\].

Among these, the second approach achieves higher speaker similarity. The results reported in Table <a href="#tab:zst_tts" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:zst_tts">6</a> are based on this second inference strategy. A comparison between the two inference methods is provided in Table <a href="#tab:zst_tts_prefix" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:zst_tts_prefix">12</a>.

**Voice Creation** Controllable TTS includes two levels of control for inference:

- Coarse-grained control: The prompt consists of the text to be synthesized along with attribute labels, e.g., \[\<_content text_\> \<_attribute label_\> $`\rightarrow`$ \<_attribute values_\> \<_global tokens_\> \<_semantic token_\>\]. In this process, the fine-grained attribute values are predicted first, followed by the generation of global tokens and then semantic tokens, in a CoT manner.

- Fine-grained control: The prompt includes the text to be synthesized, attribute levels, and precise attribute values, e.g., \[\<_content text_\> \<_attribute label_\> \<_attribute values_\> $`\rightarrow`$ \<_global tokens_\> \<_semantic token_\>\].

# Compared Zero-shot Methods

- **Seed-TTS** : A two-stage model that employs an AR LM for semantic token prediction and flow matching for acoustic feature generation.

- **FireRedTTS** : A two-stage model similar to Seed-TTS, using an AR LM for semantic tokens and flow matching for acoustic features.

- **MaskGCT** : A NAR model that applies masking-based generative strategies for speech synthesis.

- **E2 TTS** : A flow matching-based model that predicts Mel spectrograms as acoustic features.

- **F5-TTS** : A flow matching-based method that also uses Mel spectrograms as acoustic features.

- **CosyVoice** : A two-stage model with an AR LM for semantic token prediction and flow matching for acoustic feature generation.

- **CosyVoice2**  : An improved version of CosyVoice, maintaining the two-stage structure with an AR LM for semantic tokens and flow matching for acoustic features.

- **Llasa** : A single-stream codec-based TTS model that uses a single AR language model for direct single-stream code prediction.

<div id="tab:zst_tts_prefix">

<table>
<caption>Zero-shot performance of Spark-TTS with and without reference audio as a prefix.</caption>
<thead>
<tr>
<th style="text-align: left;">Model</th>
<th colspan="2" style="text-align: center;">test-zh</th>
<th colspan="2" style="text-align: center;">test-en</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"><span>2-5</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">CER<span class="math inline">↓</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">SIM<span class="math inline">↑</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">WER<span class="math inline">↓</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">SIM<span class="math inline">↑</span></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Spark-TTS</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.20</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.678</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.98</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.584</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Spark-TTS w/o prefix</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.98</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.628</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>1.32</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.474</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span id="tab:zst_tts_prefix" label="tab:zst_tts_prefix"></span>

# Objective Metircs

- **STOI** : A widely used metric for assessing speech intelligibility. Scores range from 0 to 1, with higher values indicating better intelligibility.

- **PESQ** : A speech quality assessment metric that compares the reconstructed speech to a reference speech signal. We evaluate using both wide-band (WB) and narrow-band (NB) settings.

- **UTMOS** : An automatic Mean Opinion Score (MOS) predictor, providing an estimate of overall speech quality.

- **SIM**: A speaker similarity metric, computed as the cosine similarity between the speaker embeddings of the reconstructed speech (generated speech in TTS) and the original input speech (prompt speech in TTS). We extract speaker embeddings using WavLM-large, fine-tuned on the speaker verification task .

# VoxBox

## Criteria for Pitch and Speed Categorization

- **Speed** The adoption of the 5th, 20th, 80th, and 95th percentiles to segment speech rates into distinct categories is founded on the need to accurately reflect the natural distribution of speech tempo variations within the population. These percentiles help to capture the extremes and the more central values of speech rate, ensuring that each category is meaningful and representative of specific vocal characteristics.

- **Pitch** Similar to the segmentation of speech rate, the division of pitch also starts from human subjective perception and the actual distribution characteristics. However, because humans are more sensitive to higher frequencies within the range of human fundamental frequencies, the 5th, 20th, 70th, and 90th percentiles are used as the division boundaries.

<div class="tcolorbox">

|            |                           |
| :--------- | :------------------------ |
| Very Low:  | $`< 145`$ Mel             |
| Low:       | $`145 \text{--} 164`$ Mel |
| Moderate:  | $`164 \text{--} 211`$ Mel |
| High:      | $`211 \text{--} 250`$ Mel |
| Very High: | $`>= 250`$ Mel            |

</div>

<div class="tcolorbox">

|            |                           |
| :--------- | :------------------------ |
| Very Low:  | $`< 225`$ Mel             |
| Low:       | $`225 \text{--} 258`$ Mel |
| Moderate:  | $`258 \text{--} 314`$ Mel |
| High:      | $`314 \text{--} 353`$ Mel |
| Very High: | $`>= 353`$ Mel            |

</div>

<div class="tcolorbox">

|            |                           |
| :--------- | :------------------------ |
| Very Slow: | $`< 2.7`$ SPS             |
| Slow:      | $`2.7 \text{--} 3.6`$ SPS |
| Moderate:  | $`3.6 \text{--} 5.2`$ SPS |
| Fast:      | $`5.2 \text{--} 6.1`$ SPS |
| Very Fast: | $`>= 6.1`$ SPS            |

</div>

<div class="tcolorbox">

|            |                           |
| :--------- | :------------------------ |
| Very Slow: | $`< 2.6`$ SPS             |
| Slow:      | $`2.6 \text{--} 3.4`$ SPS |
| Moderate:  | $`3.4 \text{--} 4.8`$ SPS |
| Fast:      | $`4.8 \text{--} 5.5`$ SPS |
| Very Fast: | $`>= 5.5`$ SPS            |

</div>

## Data for Gender Predictor Training

We fine-tune the WavLM-large model for gender classification using datasets that contain explicit gender labels, including VCTK , AISHELL-3 , MLS-English , MAGICDATA , and CommonVoice .

## Annotation

In addition to the attributes involved in the experiments of this paper, to make VoxBox applicable to a wider range of scenarios, we have also annotated more information for each sample of VoxBox, including age and emotion. Similar to the gender annotations, we fine-tune the WavLM-large model based on AISHELL-3, VCTK, MAGICDATA, CommonVoice, and HQ-Conversations to predict five age ranges: Child, Teenager, Young Adult, Middle-aged, and Elderly. The performance metrics for both the gender and age predictors are presented in Table <a href="#tb:predictor" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tb:predictor">13</a>, where both Wav2vec 2.0-ft  and SpeechCraft  are based on the pre-trained Wav2vec 2.0 model.

<div id="tb:predictor">

| Model          | Age Acc$`\uparrow`$ | Gender Acc$`\uparrow`$ |
| :------------- | :-----------------: | :--------------------: |
| wav2vec 2.0-ft |        80.2         |          98.8          |
| SpeechCraft    |        87.7         |          97.7          |
| Our            |      **95.6**       |        **99.4**        |

Comparison of different models on attribute predictions: All evaluations are conducted on the AISHELL-3 test dataset.

</div>

<span id="tb:predictor" label="tb:predictor"></span>

For datasets without emotion labels in the original metadata, we assign various emotion labels, sourced from different models, to the relevant samples. Specifically, we provide the following tags:

- **emotion2vec Emotion**: Emotion label predicted with Emtion2vec .

- **Confidence Score**: Confidence score of the the predicted emotion2vec label given by emotion2vec.

- **SenseVoiceSmall Emotion**: Emotion label predicted with SenseVoiceSmall[^9].

- **Text Emotion**: Emotion label predicted with Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct [^10] with text as input. The prompt case for English text can be found in Box

<div class="tcolorbox">

Please assess the emotion of the following text and select the most appropriate label from these options:

\[Fearful, Happy, Disgusted, Sad, Surprised, Angry, Neutral\].

Please note, only provide the label without any additional description or reasoning. Here is the text: "Clearly, the need for a personal loan is written in the stars." <span id="box:prompt" label="box:prompt"></span>

</div>

## Data Statistics

The distributions of speaking rate, duration, and pitch are shown in Fig <a href="#fig:data_statistic_his" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:data_statistic_his">7</a>, while the distributions of gender and age are presented in Fig <a href="#fig:data_statistic_pie" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:data_statistic_pie">8</a>.

<div class="table*">

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th style="text-align: left;">Data</th>
<th style="text-align: center;">Language</th>
<th style="text-align: center;">#Utterance</th>
<th colspan="3" style="text-align: center;">Duration (h)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"><span>4-6</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Male</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Female</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Total</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">AISHELL-3 <span class="citation" data-cites="shi2020aishell"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Chinese</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">88,035</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">16.01</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">69.61</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">85.62</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">CASIA <span class="citation" data-cites="zhang2008design"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Chinese</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">857</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">0.25</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">0.2</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">0.44</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Emilia-CN <span class="citation" data-cites="he2024emilia"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Chinese</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">15,629,241</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">22,017.56</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">12,741.89</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">34,759.45</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">ESD <span class="citation" data-cites="zhou2021seen"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Chinese</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">16,101</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">6.69</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">7.68</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">14.37</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">HQ-Conversations <span class="citation" data-cites="zhou2024codec"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Chinese</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">50,982</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">35.77</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">64.23</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">100</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">M3ED <span class="citation" data-cites="zhao2022m3ed"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Chinese</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">253</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">0.04</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">0.06</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">0.1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">MAGICDATA <span class="citation" data-cites="MAGICDATA2019"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Chinese</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">609,474</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">360.31</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">393.81</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">754.13</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">MER2023 <span class="citation" data-cites="lian2023mer"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Chinese</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1,667</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">0.86</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.07</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.93</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">NCSSD-CL-CN <span class="citation" data-cites="liu2024generative"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Chinese</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">98,628</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">53.83</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">59.21</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">113.04</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">NCSSD-RC-CN <span class="citation" data-cites="liu2024generative"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Chinese</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">21,688</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">7.05</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">22.53</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">29.58</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">WenetSpeech4TTS <span class="citation" data-cites="ma2024wenetspeech4tts"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Chinese</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">8,856,480</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">7,504.19</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">4,264.3</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">11,768.49</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Total</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Chinese</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">25,373,406</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">30,002.56</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">17,624.59</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">47,627.15</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">CREMA-D <span class="citation" data-cites="cao2014crema"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">English</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">809</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">0.3</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">0.27</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">0.57</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Dailytalk <span class="citation" data-cites="lee2023dailytalk"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">English</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">23,754</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">10.79</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">10.86</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">21.65</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Emilia­EN <span class="citation" data-cites="he2024emilia"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">English</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">8,303,103</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">13,724.76</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">6,573.22</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">20,297.98</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">EMNS <span class="citation" data-cites="noriy2023emns"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">English</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">918</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">0</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.49</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.49</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">EmoV-DB <span class="citation" data-cites="adigwe2018emotional"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">English</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">3,647</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2.22</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2.79</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">5</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Expresso <span class="citation" data-cites="nguyen2023expresso"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">English</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">11,595</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">5.47</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">5.39</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">10.86</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Gigaspeech <span class="citation" data-cites="chen2021gigaspeech"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">English</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">6,619,339</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">4,310.19</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2,885.66</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">7,195.85</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Hi-Fi TTS <span class="citation" data-cites="bakhturina2021hi"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">English</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">323,911</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">133.31</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">158.38</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">291.68</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">IEMOCAP <span class="citation" data-cites="busso2008iemocap"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">English</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2,423</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.66</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.31</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2.97</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">JL-Corpus <span class="citation" data-cites="james2018open"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">English</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">893</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">0.26</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">0.26</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">0.52</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Librispeech <span class="citation" data-cites="panayotov2015librispeech"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">English</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">230,865</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">393.95</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">367.67</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">761.62</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">LibriTTS-R <span class="citation" data-cites="koizumi2023libritts"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">English</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">363,270</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">277.87</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">283.03</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">560.9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">MEAD <span class="citation" data-cites="wang2020mead"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">English</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">3,767</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2.26</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2.42</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">4.68</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">MELD <span class="citation" data-cites="poria2018meld"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">English</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">5,100</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2.14</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.94</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">4.09</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">MLS-English <span class="citation" data-cites="Pratap2020MLSAL"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">English</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">6,319,002</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">14,366.25</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">11,212.92</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">25,579.18</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">MSP-Podcast <span class="citation" data-cites="martinez2020msp"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">English</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">796</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">0.76</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">0.56</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.32</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">NCSSD-CL-EN <span class="citation" data-cites="liu2024generative"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">English</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">62,107</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">36.84</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">32.93</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">69.77</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">NCSSD-RL-EN <span class="citation" data-cites="liu2024generative"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">English</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">10,032</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">4.18</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">14.92</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">19.09</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">RAVDESS <span class="citation" data-cites="livingstone2018ryerson"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">English</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">950</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">0.49</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">0.48</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">0.97</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">SAVEE <span class="citation" data-cites="jackson2014surrey"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">English</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">286</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">0.15</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">0.15</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">0.31</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">TESS <span class="citation" data-cites="yu2021vector"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">English</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1,956</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">0</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.15</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.15</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">VCTK <span class="citation" data-cites="yamagishi2019vctk"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;">English</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">44,283</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">16.95</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">24.51</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">41.46</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Total</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">English</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">22,332,806</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">33,290.8</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">21,582.31</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">54,873.11</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align: left;">Overall Total</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">47,706,212</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">63,293.36</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">39,206.9</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">102,500.26</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="tab:data" label="tab:data"></span>

</div>

<figure id="fig:data_statistic_his" data-latex-placement="h!">
<figure>
<embed src="figures/data_statistic/en_speed_final.pdf" />
</figure>
<figure>
<embed src="figures/data_statistic/male_pitch_final.pdf" />
</figure>
<figure>
<embed src="figures/data_statistic/en_dur_final.pdf" />
</figure>
<figure>
<embed src="figures/data_statistic/zh_speed_final.pdf" />
</figure>
<figure>
<embed src="figures/data_statistic/female_pitch_final.pdf" />
</figure>
<figure>
<embed src="figures/data_statistic/zh_dur_final.pdf" />
</figure>
<figcaption>Data distribution of VoxBox.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:data_statistic_pie" data-latex-placement="htp">
<embed src="figures/data_statistic/double_pie_figure.pdf" style="width:80.0%" />
<figcaption>Gender and age distribution of VoxBox.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Source Data

- **AISHELL-3**: A multi-speaker Mandarin speech corpus for TTS. Source: <https://www.openslr.org/93/>

- **CASIA**: An emotional multi-speaker Mandarin speech corpus containing six emotions for TTS. Source: <https://gitcode.com/open-source-toolkit/bc5e6>

- **CREMA-D**: An emotional multi-speaker multilingual speech corpus containing six emotions and four intensity levels for TTS. Source:<https://github.com/CheyneyComputerScience/CREMA-D>

- **Dailytalk**: A multi-speaker English speech corpus with conversational style for TTS. Source:<https://github.com/keonlee9420/DailyTalk>

- **Emilia**: A multi-speaker multilingual speech corpus containing six languages for TTS. Source: <https://emilia-dataset.github.io/Emilia-Demo-Page/>

- **EMNS**: An emotional single-speaker English speech corpus for TTS. Source: <https://www.openslr.org/136>

- **EmoV-DB**: An emotional multi-speaker English speech corpus containing four emotions for TTS. Source: <https://mega.nz/folder/KBp32apT#gLIgyWf9iQ-yqnWFUFuUHg/mYwUnI4K>

- **ESD**: An emotional multi-speaker bilingual speech corpus containing five emotions for TTS. Source: <https://hltsingapore.github.io/ESD/>

- **Expresso**: A multi-speaker English speech corpus with reading and improvising conversational style for TTS. Source: <https://speechbot.github.io/expresso/>

- **Gigaspeech**: A multi-speaker English speech corpus with reading style for TTS. Source: <https://github.com/SpeechColab/GigaSpeech>

- **Hi-Fi TTS**: A multi-speaker English speech corpus with reading style for TTS. Source: <https://openslr.org/109/>

- **HQ-Conversations**: A mutli-speaker Mandarin speech corpus with conversational style for TTS. Source: <https://www.magicdatatech.com/iscslp-2024/>

- **IEMOCAP**: An emotional multi-speaker English speech corpus containing five emotions for TTS. Source: <https://sail.usc.edu/iemocap/iemocap_release.htm>

- **JL-Corpus**: An emotional multi-speaker English speech corpus containing five primary emotions and five secondary emotions for TTS. Source: <https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/tli725/jl-corpus>

- **Librispeech**: A mutli-speaker English speech corpus with reading style for TTS. Source: <https://tensorflow.google.cn/datasets/catalog/librispeech>

- **LibriTTS-R**: Sound quality improved version of the LibriTTS  corpus which is a large-scale corpus of English speech for TTS. Source: <https://www.openslr.org/141/>

- **M3ED**: An emotional mutli-speaker Mandarin speech corpus containing seven emotions for TTS. Source: <https://github.com/aim3-ruc/rucm3ed>

- **MAGICDATA**: A mutli-speaker Mandarin speech corpus with conversational style for TTS. Source: <https://openslr.org/68/>

- **MEAD**: An emotional mutli-speaker English speech corpus containing eight emotions and three intensity levels for TTS. Source: <https://github.com/uniBruce/Mead>

- **MELD**: An emotional mutli-speaker English speech corpus containing seven emotions for TTS. Source: <https://affective-meld.github.io/>

- **MER2023**: An emotional mutli-speaker Mandarin speech corpus containing six emotions for TTS. Source: <http://www.merchallenge.cn/datasets>

- **MLS-English**: A mutli-speaker English speech corpus for TTS. Source: <https://www.openslr.org/94/>

- **MSP-Podcast**: An emotional mutli-speaker English speech corpus containing eight emotions for TTS. Source: <https://ecs.utdallas.edu/research/researchlabs/msp-lab/MSP-Podcast.html>

- **NCSSD-CL**: A mutli-speaker bilingual speech corpus for TTS. Source: <https://github.com/uniBruce/Mead>

- **NCSSD-RL**: A mutli-speaker bilingual speech corpus for TTS. Source: <https://github.com/uniBruce/Mead>

- **RAVDESS**: An emotional mutli-speaker English speech corpus containing eight emotions and two intensity levels for TTS. Source: <https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/uwrfkaggler/ravdess-emotional-speech-audio>

- **SAVEE**: An emotional mutli-speaker English speech corpus containing seven emotions for TTS. Source: <https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/ejlok1/surrey-audiovisual-expressed-emotion-savee>

- **TESS**: An emotional mutli-speaker English speech corpus containing seven emotions for TTS. Source: <https://tspace.library.utoronto.ca/handle/1807/24487>

- **VCTK**: A mutli-speaker English speech corpus for TTS. Source: <https://datashare.ed.ac.uk/handle/10283/2651>

- **WenetSpeech4TTS**: A large-scale mutli-speaker Mandarin speech corpus for TTS. Source: <https://wenetspeech4tts.github.io/wenetspeech4tts/>

# SparkVox: A Toolkit for Speech Related Tasks

The training code for Spark-TTS will be integrated into the open-source SparkVox framework. SparkVox is a training framework designed for speech-related tasks, supporting a variety of applications, including: vocoder, codec, TTS, and speech understanding. Additionally, SparkVox provides various file processing tools for both text and speech data, facilitating efficient data handling. Its simplified framework structure is illustrated in Fig. <a href="#fig:sparkvox" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:sparkvox">9</a>.

<figure id="fig:sparkvox" data-latex-placement="htp">
<embed src="figures/spark-tts/SparkVox.pdf" />
<figcaption>Framework of SparkVox.</figcaption>
</figure>

[^1]: Project leader.

[^2]: Corresponding author.

[^3]: <https://huggingface.co/facebook/wav2vec2-large-xlsr-53>

[^4]: <https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct>

[^5]: <https://pypi.org/project/pyworld/>

[^6]:
    ZH: <https://huggingface.co/funasr/paraformer-zh>\
    EN: <https://huggingface.co/FunAudioLLM/SenseVoiceSmall>

[^7]: <https://huggingface.co/openai/whisper-large-v3>

[^8]: <https://github.com/BytedanceSpeech/seed-tts-eval>

[^9]: <https://huggingface.co/FunAudioLLM/SenseVoiceSmall>

[^10]: <https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct>

## References

1. Adaeze Adigwe, No{\'e} Tits, Kevin~El Haddad, Sarah Ostadabbas, and Thierry Dutoit. 2018.
   \newblock The emotional voices database: Towards controlling the emotion dimension in voice generation systems.
   \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.09514}. [arXiv:1806.09514](https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.09514)
2. Philip Anastassiou, Jiawei Chen, Jitong Chen, Yuanzhe Chen, Zhuo Chen, Ziyi Chen, Jian Cong, Lelai Deng, Chuang Ding, Lu~Gao, et~al. 2024.
   \newblock Seed-tts: A family of high-quality versatile speech generation models.
   \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.02430}. [arXiv:2406.02430](../2024/2406.02430.md)
3. Asger~Heidemann Andersen, Jan~Mark de~Haan, Zheng-Hua Tan, and Jesper Jensen. 2017.
   \newblock A non-intrusive short-time objective intelligibility measure.
   \newblock In \emph{2017 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 5085--5089. IEEE.
4. Rosana Ardila, Megan Branson, Kelly Davis, Michael Henretty, Michael Kohler, Josh Meyer, Reuben Morais, Lindsay Saunders, Francis~M Tyers, and Gregor Weber. 2019.
   \newblock Common voice: A massively-multilingual speech corpus.
   \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06670}. [arXiv:1912.06670](https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.06670)
5. Alexei Baevski, Yuhao Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli. 2020.
   \newblock wav2vec 2.0: A framework for self-supervised learning of speech representations.
   \newblock \emph{Advances in neural information processing systems}, 33:12449--12460.
6. Evelina Bakhturina, Vitaly Lavrukhin, Boris Ginsburg, and Yang Zhang. 2021.
   \newblock {Hi-Fi Multi-Speaker English TTS Dataset}.
   \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.01497}. [arXiv:2104.01497](../2021/2104.01497.md)
7. Yoshua Bengio, Nicholas L{\'e}onard, and Aaron Courville. 2013.
   \newblock Estimating or propagating gradients through stochastic neurons for conditional computation.
   \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.3432}. [arXiv:1308.3432](https://arxiv.org/abs/1308.3432)
8. Felix Burkhardt, Johannes Wagner, Hagen Wierstorf, Florian Eyben, and Bj{\"o}rn Schuller. 2023.
   \newblock Speech-based age and gender prediction with transformers.
   \newblock In \emph{Speech Communication; 15th ITG Conference}, pages 46--50. VDE.
9. Carlos Busso, Murtaza Bulut, Chi-Chun Lee, Abe Kazemzadeh, Emily Mower, Samuel Kim, Jeannette~N Chang, Sungbok Lee, and Shrikanth~S Narayanan. 2008.
   \newblock Iemocap: Interactive emotional dyadic motion capture database.
   \newblock \emph{Language resources and evaluation}, 42:335--359.
10. Houwei Cao, David~G Cooper, Michael~K Keutmann, Ruben~C Gur, Ani Nenkova, and Ragini Verma. 2014.
    \newblock Crema-d: Crowd-sourced emotional multimodal actors dataset.
    \newblock \emph{IEEE transactions on affective computing}, 5(4):377--390.
11. Edresson Casanova, Kelly Davis, Eren G{\"o}lge, G{\"o}rkem G{\"o}knar, Iulian Gulea, Logan Hart, Aya Aljafari, Joshua Meyer, Reuben Morais, Samuel Olayemi, et~al. 2024.
    \newblock Xtts: a massively multilingual zero-shot text-to-speech model.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04904}. [arXiv:2406.04904](../2024/2406.04904.md)
12. Guoguo Chen, Shuzhou Chai, Guanbo Wang, Jiayu Du, Wei-Qiang Zhang, Chao Weng, Dan Su, Daniel Povey, Jan Trmal, Junbo Zhang, et~al. 2021.
    \newblock Gigaspeech: An evolving, multi-domain asr corpus with 10,000 hours of transcribed audio.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.06909}. [arXiv:2106.06909](https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.06909)
13. Sanyuan Chen, Shujie Liu, Long Zhou, Yanqing Liu, Xu~Tan, Jinyu Li, Sheng Zhao, Yao Qian, and Furu Wei. 2024{\natexlab{a}}.
    \newblock Vall-e 2: Neural codec language models are human parity zero-shot text to speech synthesizers.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.05370}. [arXiv:2406.05370](../2024/2406.05370.md)
14. Yushen Chen, Zhikang Niu, Ziyang Ma, Keqi Deng, Chunhui Wang, Jian Zhao, Kai Yu, and Xie Chen. 2024{\natexlab{b}}.
    \newblock F5-tts: A fairytaler that fakes fluent and faithful speech with flow matching.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06885}. [arXiv:2410.06885](../2024/2410.06885.md)
15. Zhengyang Chen, Sanyuan Chen, Yu~Wu, Yao Qian, Chengyi Wang, Shujie Liu, Yanmin Qian, and Michael Zeng. 2022.
    \newblock Large-scale self-supervised speech representation learning for automatic speaker verification.
    \newblock In \emph{ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 6147--6151. IEEE.
16. Jade Copet, Felix Kreuk, Itai Gat, Tal Remez, David Kant, Gabriel Synnaeve, Yossi Adi, and Alexandre D{\'e}fossez. 2024.
    \newblock Simple and controllable music generation.
    \newblock \emph{Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems}, 36.
17. Alexandre D{\'e}fossez, Jade Copet, Gabriel Synnaeve, and Yossi Adi. 2022.
    \newblock High fidelity neural audio compression.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.13438}. [arXiv:2210.13438](https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.13438)
18. Alexandre D{\'e}fossez, Laurent Mazar{\'e}, Manu Orsini, Am{\'e}lie Royer, Patrick P{\'e}rez, Herv{\'e} J{\'e}gou, Edouard Grave, and Neil Zeghidour. 2024.
    \newblock Moshi: a speech-text foundation model for real-time dialogue.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.00037}. [arXiv:2410.00037](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.00037)
19. Brecht Desplanques, Jenthe Thienpondt, and Kris Demuynck. 2020.
    \newblock Ecapa-tdnn: Emphasized channel attention, propagation and aggregation in tdnn based speaker verification.
    \newblock \emph{Interspeech 2020}.
20. Zhihao Du, Qian Chen, Shiliang Zhang, Kai Hu, Heng Lu, Yexin Yang, Hangrui Hu, Siqi Zheng, Yue Gu, Ziyang Ma, et~al. 2024{\natexlab{a}}.
    \newblock Cosyvoice: A scalable multilingual zero-shot text-to-speech synthesizer based on supervised semantic tokens.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.05407}. [arXiv:2407.05407](../2024/2407.05407.md)
21. Zhihao Du, Yuxuan Wang, Qian Chen, Xian Shi, Xiang Lv, Tianyu Zhao, Zhifu Gao, Yexin Yang, Changfeng Gao, Hui Wang, et~al. 2024{\natexlab{b}}.
    \newblock Cosyvoice 2: Scalable streaming speech synthesis with large language models.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.10117}. [arXiv:2412.10117](../2024/2412.10117.md)
22. Jesse Engel, Lamtharn Hantrakul, Chenjie Gu, and Adam Roberts. 2020.
    \newblock Ddsp: Differentiable digital signal processing.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.04643}. [arXiv:2001.04643](https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.04643)
23. Zhifu Gao, Zerui Li, Jiaming Wang, Haoneng Luo, Xian Shi, Mengzhe Chen, Yabin Li, Lingyun Zuo, Zhihao Du, Zhangyu Xiao, et~al. 2023.
    \newblock Funasr: A fundamental end-to-end speech recognition toolkit.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11013}. [arXiv:2305.11013](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.11013)
24. Hugo~Flores Garcia, Prem Seetharaman, Rithesh Kumar, and Bryan Pardo. 2023.
    \newblock Vampnet: Music generation via masked acoustic token modeling.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04686}. [arXiv:2307.04686](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.04686)
25. Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. 2020.
    \newblock Generative adversarial networks.
    \newblock \emph{Communications of the ACM}, 63(11):139--144.
26. Alexey Gritsenko, Tim Salimans, Rianne van~den Berg, Jasper Snoek, and Nal Kalchbrenner. 2020.
    \newblock A spectral energy distance for parallel speech synthesis.
    \newblock \emph{Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems}, 33:13062--13072.
27. Hao-Han Guo, Kun Liu, Fei-Yu Shen, Yi-Chen Wu, Feng-Long Xie, Kun Xie, and Kai-Tuo Xu. 2024.
    \newblock Fireredtts: A foundation text-to-speech framework for industry-level generative speech applications.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.03283}. [arXiv:2409.03283](../2024/2409.03283.md)
28. Zhifang Guo, Yichong Leng, Yihan Wu, Sheng Zhao, and Xu~Tan. 2023.
    \newblock Prompttts: Controllable text-to-speech with text descriptions.
    \newblock In \emph{ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 1--5. IEEE.
29. Haorui He, Zengqiang Shang, Chaoren Wang, Xuyuan Li, Yicheng Gu, Hua Hua, Liwei Liu, Chen Yang, Jiaqi Li, Peiyang Shi, et~al. 2024.
    \newblock Emilia: An extensive, multilingual, and diverse speech dataset for large-scale speech generation.
    \newblock In \emph{2024 IEEE Spoken Language Technology Workshop (SLT)}, pages 885--890. IEEE.
30. Zhichao Huang, Chutong Meng, and Tom Ko. 2023.
    \newblock Repcodec: A speech representation codec for speech tokenization.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00169}. [arXiv:2309.00169](https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.00169)
31. Philip Jackson and SJUoSG Haq. 2014.
    \newblock Surrey audio-visual expressed emotion (savee) database.
    \newblock \emph{University of Surrey: Guildford, UK}.
32. Jesin James, Li~Tian, and Catherine Watson. 2018.
    \newblock An open source emotional speech corpus for human robot interaction applications.
    \newblock \emph{Interspeech 2018}.
33. Shengpeng Ji, Ziyue Jiang, Wen Wang, Yifu Chen, Minghui Fang, Jialong Zuo, Qian Yang, Xize Cheng, Zehan Wang, Ruiqi Li, et~al. 2024{\natexlab{a}}.
    \newblock Wavtokenizer: an efficient acoustic discrete codec tokenizer for audio language modeling.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.16532}. [arXiv:2408.16532](https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.16532)
34. Shengpeng Ji, Jialong Zuo, Minghui Fang, Ziyue Jiang, Feiyang Chen, Xinyu Duan, Baoxing Huai, and Zhou Zhao. 2024{\natexlab{b}}.
    \newblock Textrolspeech: A text style control speech corpus with codec language text-to-speech models.
    \newblock In \emph{ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 10301--10305. IEEE.
35. Zeyu Jin, Jia Jia, Qixin Wang, Kehan Li, Shuoyi Zhou, Songtao Zhou, Xiaoyu Qin, and Zhiyong Wu. 2024.
    \newblock Speechcraft: A fine-grained expressive speech dataset with natural language description.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Multimedia}, pages 1255--1264.
36. Yuma Koizumi, Heiga Zen, Shigeki Karita, Yifan Ding, Kohei Yatabe, Nobuyuki Morioka, Michiel Bacchiani, Yu~Zhang, Wei Han, and Ankur Bapna. 2023.
    \newblock Libritts-r: A restored multi-speaker text-to-speech corpus.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18802}. [arXiv:2305.18802](../2023/2305.18802.md)
37. Jungil Kong, Jaehyeon Kim, and Jaekyoung Bae. 2020.
    \newblock Hifi-gan: Generative adversarial networks for efficient and high fidelity speech synthesis.
    \newblock \emph{Advances in neural information processing systems}, 33:17022--17033.
38. Felix Kreuk, Gabriel Synnaeve, Adam Polyak, Uriel Singer, Alexandre D{\'e}fossez, Jade Copet, Devi Parikh, Yaniv Taigman, and Yossi Adi. 2023.
    \newblock Audiogen: Textually guided audio generation.
    \newblock In \emph{The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations}.
39. Kundan Kumar, Rithesh Kumar, Thibault De~Boissiere, Lucas Gestin, Wei~Zhen Teoh, Jose Sotelo, Alexandre De~Brebisson, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron~C Courville. 2019.
    \newblock Melgan: Generative adversarial networks for conditional waveform synthesis.
    \newblock \emph{Advances in neural information processing systems}, 32.
40. Rithesh Kumar, Prem Seetharaman, Alejandro Luebs, Ishaan Kumar, and Kundan Kumar. 2024.
    \newblock High-fidelity audio compression with improved rvqgan.
    \newblock \emph{Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems}, 36.
41. Gael Le~Lan, Varun Nagaraja, Ernie Chang, David Kant, Zhaoheng Ni, Yangyang Shi, Forrest Iandola, and Vikas Chandra. 2024.
    \newblock Stack-and-delay: a new codebook pattern for music generation.
    \newblock In \emph{ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 796--800. IEEE.
42. Keon Lee, Kyumin Park, and Daeyoung Kim. 2023.
    \newblock Dailytalk: Spoken dialogue dataset for conversational text-to-speech.
    \newblock In \emph{ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 1--5. IEEE.
43. Hanzhao Li, Liumeng Xue, Haohan Guo, Xinfa Zhu, Yuanjun Lv, Lei Xie, Yunlin Chen, Hao Yin, and Zhifei Li. 2024{\natexlab{a}}.
    \newblock Single-codec: Single-codebook speech codec towards high-performance speech generation.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07422}. [arXiv:2406.07422](../2024/2406.07422.md)
44. Xu~Li, Qirui Wang, and Xiaoyu Liu. 2024{\natexlab{b}}.
    \newblock Masksr: Masked language model for full-band speech restoration.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.02092}. [arXiv:2406.02092](https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.02092)
45. Yue Li, Xinsheng Wang, Li~Zhang, and Lei Xie. 2024{\natexlab{c}}.
    \newblock Scdnet: Self-supervised learning feature-based speaker change detection.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08393}. [arXiv:2406.08393](https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.08393)
46. Zheng Lian, Haiyang Sun, Licai Sun, Kang Chen, Mngyu Xu, Kexin Wang, Ke~Xu, Yu~He, Ying Li, Jinming Zhao, et~al. 2023.
    \newblock Mer 2023: Multi-label learning, modality robustness, and semi-supervised learning.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Multimedia}, pages 9610--9614.
47. Rui Liu, Yifan Hu, Yi~Ren, Xiang Yin, and Haizhou Li. 2024.
    \newblock Generative expressive conversational speech synthesis.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Multimedia}, pages 4187--4196.
48. Zhuang Liu, Hanzi Mao, Chao-Yuan Wu, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Trevor Darrell, and Saining Xie. 2022.
    \newblock A convnet for the 2020s.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition}, pages 11976--11986.
49. Steven~R Livingstone and Frank~A Russo. 2018.
    \newblock The ryerson audio-visual database of emotional speech and song (ravdess): A dynamic, multimodal set of facial and vocal expressions in north american english.
    \newblock \emph{PloS one}, 13(5):e0196391.
50. Dan Lyth and Simon King. 2024.
    \newblock Natural language guidance of high-fidelity text-to-speech with synthetic annotations.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01912}. [arXiv:2402.01912](../2024/2402.01912.md)
51. Linhan Ma, Dake Guo, Kun Song, Yuepeng Jiang, Shuai Wang, Liumeng Xue, Weiming Xu, Huan Zhao, Binbin Zhang, and Lei Xie. 2024.
    \newblock Wenetspeech4tts: A 12,800-hour mandarin tts corpus for large speech generation model benchmark.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.05763}. [arXiv:2406.05763](../2024/2406.05763.md)
52. Ziyang Ma, Zhisheng Zheng, Jiaxin Ye, Jinchao Li, Zhifu Gao, Shiliang Zhang, and Xie Chen. 2023.
    \newblock emotion2vec: Self-supervised pre-training for speech emotion representation.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.15185}. [arXiv:2312.15185](https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.15185)
53. MagicData. 2019.
    \newblock \href {http://www.imagicdatatech.com/index.php/home/dataopensource/data_info/id/101} {Magicdata mandarin chinese read speech corpus}.
54. Luz Martinez, Mohammed Abdelwahab, and Carlos Busso. 2020.
    \newblock The msp-conversation corpus.
    \newblock \emph{Interspeech 2020}.
55. Fabian Mentzer, David Minnen, Eirikur Agustsson, and Michael Tschannen. 2023.
    \newblock Finite scalar quantization: Vq-vae made simple.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.15505}. [arXiv:2309.15505](https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.15505)
56. Tu~Anh Nguyen, Wei-Ning Hsu, Antony d'Avirro, Bowen Shi, Itai Gat, Maryam Fazel-Zarani, Tal Remez, Jade Copet, Gabriel Synnaeve, Michael Hassid, et~al. 2023.
    \newblock Expresso: A benchmark and analysis of discrete expressive speech resynthesis.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.05725}. [arXiv:2308.05725](../2023/2308.05725.md)
57. Kari~Ali Noriy, Xiaosong Yang, and Jian~Jun Zhang. 2023.
    \newblock Emns/imz/corpus: An emotive single-speaker dataset for narrative storytelling in games, television and graphic novels.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13137}. [arXiv:2305.13137](../2023/2305.13137.md)
58. Vassil Panayotov, Guoguo Chen, Daniel Povey, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. 2015.
    \newblock Librispeech: an asr corpus based on public domain audio books.
    \newblock In \emph{2015 IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech and signal processing (ICASSP)}, pages 5206--5210. IEEE.
59. Julian~D Parker, Anton Smirnov, Jordi Pons, CJ~Carr, Zack Zukowski, Zach Evans, and Xubo Liu. 2024.
    \newblock Scaling transformers for low-bitrate high-quality speech coding.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.19842}. [arXiv:2411.19842](https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.19842)
60. Ankita Pasad, Bowen Shi, and Karen Livescu. 2023.
    \newblock Comparative layer-wise analysis of self-supervised speech models.
    \newblock In \emph{ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 1--5. IEEE.
61. Soujanya Poria, Devamanyu Hazarika, Navonil Majumder, Gautam Naik, Erik Cambria, and Rada Mihalcea. 2018.
    \newblock Meld: A multimodal multi-party dataset for emotion recognition in conversations.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.02508}. [arXiv:1810.02508](https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.02508)
62. Vineel Pratap, Qiantong Xu, Anuroop Sriram, Gabriel Synnaeve, and Ronan Collobert. 2020.
    \newblock Mls: A large-scale multilingual dataset for speech research.
    \newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2012.03411.
63. Alec Radford, Jong~Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine McLeavey, and Ilya Sutskever. 2023.
    \newblock Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision.
    \newblock In \emph{International conference on machine learning}, pages 28492--28518. PMLR.
64. Yong Ren, Tao Wang, Jiangyan Yi, Le~Xu, Jianhua Tao, Chu~Yuan Zhang, and Junzuo Zhou. 2024.
    \newblock Fewer-token neural speech codec with time-invariant codes.
    \newblock In \emph{ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 12737--12741. IEEE.
65. Antony~W Rix, John~G Beerends, Michael~P Hollier, and Andries~P Hekstra. 2001.
    \newblock Perceptual evaluation of speech quality (pesq)-a new method for speech quality assessment of telephone networks and codecs.
    \newblock In \emph{2001 IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech, and signal processing. Proceedings (Cat. No. 01CH37221)}, volume~2, pages 749--752. IEEE.
66. Takaaki Saeki, Detai Xin, Wataru Nakata, Tomoki Koriyama, Shinnosuke Takamichi, and Hiroshi Saruwatari. 2022.
    \newblock Utmos: Utokyo-sarulab system for voicemos challenge 2022.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02152}. [arXiv:2204.02152](../2022/2204.02152.md)
67. Yao Shi, Hui Bu, Xin Xu, Shaoji Zhang, and Ming Li. 2020.
    \newblock Aishell-3: A multi-speaker mandarin tts corpus and the baselines.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11567}. [arXiv:2010.11567](https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.11567)
68. Dehua Tao, Daxin Tan, Yu~Ting Yeung, Xiao Chen, and Tan Lee. 2024.
    \newblock Toneunit: A speech discretization approach for tonal language speech synthesis.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08989}. [arXiv:2406.08989](https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.08989)
69. Jianhua Tao, Fangzhou Liu, Meng Zhang, and Huibin Jia. 2008.
    \newblock Design of speech corpus for mandarin text to speech.
    \newblock In \emph{The blizzard challenge 2008 workshop}.
70. Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timoth{\'e}e Lacroix, Baptiste Rozi{\`e}re, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et~al. 2023.
    \newblock Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971}. [arXiv:2302.13971](https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.13971)
71. Aaron Van Den~Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et~al. 2017.
    \newblock Neural discrete representation learning.
    \newblock \emph{Advances in neural information processing systems}, 30.
72. Apoorv Vyas, Bowen Shi, Matthew Le, Andros Tjandra, Yi-Chiao Wu, Baishan Guo, Jiemin Zhang, Xinyue Zhang, Robert Adkins, William Ngan, et~al. 2023.
    \newblock Audiobox: Unified audio generation with natural language prompts.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.15821}. [arXiv:2312.15821](../2023/2312.15821.md)
73. Chengyi Wang, Sanyuan Chen, Yu~Wu, Ziqiang Zhang, Long Zhou, Shujie Liu, Zhuo Chen, Yanqing Liu, Huaming Wang, Jinyu Li, et~al. 2023{\natexlab{a}}.
    \newblock Neural codec language models are zero-shot text to speech synthesizers.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.02111}. [arXiv:2301.02111](../2023/2301.02111.md)
74. Hongji Wang, Chengdong Liang, Shuai Wang, Zhengyang Chen, Binbin Zhang, Xu~Xiang, Yanlei Deng, and Yanmin Qian. 2023{\natexlab{b}}.
    \newblock Wespeaker: A research and production oriented speaker embedding learning toolkit.
    \newblock In \emph{ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 1--5. IEEE.
75. Kaisiyuan Wang, Qianyi Wu, Linsen Song, Zhuoqian Yang, Wayne Wu, Chen Qian, Ran He, Yu~Qiao, and Chen~Change Loy. 2020.
    \newblock Mead: A large-scale audio-visual dataset for emotional talking-face generation.
    \newblock In \emph{European Conference on Computer Vision}, pages 700--717. Springer.
76. Xiaofei Wang, Manthan Thakker, Zhuo Chen, Naoyuki Kanda, Sefik~Emre Eskimez, Sanyuan Chen, Min Tang, Shujie Liu, Jinyu Li, and Takuya Yoshioka. 2024{\natexlab{a}}.
    \newblock Speechx: Neural codec language model as a versatile speech transformer.
    \newblock \emph{IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing}.
77. Yuancheng Wang, Haoyue Zhan, Liwei Liu, Ruihong Zeng, Haotian Guo, Jiachen Zheng, Qiang Zhang, Xueyao Zhang, Shunsi Zhang, and Zhizheng Wu. 2024{\natexlab{b}}.
    \newblock Maskgct: Zero-shot text-to-speech with masked generative codec transformer.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.00750}. [arXiv:2409.00750](../2024/2409.00750.md)
78. Zhichao Wang, Yuanzhe Chen, Xinsheng Wang, Lei Xie, and Yuping Wang. 2024{\natexlab{c}}.
    \newblock Streamvoice+: Evolving into end-to-end streaming zero-shot voice conversion.
    \newblock \emph{IEEE Signal Processing Letters}.
79. Haibin Wu, Naoyuki Kanda, Sefik~Emre Eskimez, and Jinyu Li. 2024.
    \newblock Ts3-codec: Transformer-based simple streaming single codec.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.18803}. [arXiv:2411.18803](https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.18803)
80. Detai Xin, Xu~Tan, Shinnosuke Takamichi, and Hiroshi Saruwatari. 2024.
    \newblock Bigcodec: Pushing the limits of low-bitrate neural speech codec.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.05377}. [arXiv:2409.05377](https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.05377)
81. Junichi Yamagishi, Christophe Veaux, and Kirsten MacDonald. 2019.
    \newblock \href {https://doi.org/10.7488/ds/2645} {{CSTR VCTK Corpus}: English multi-speaker corpus for {CSTR} voice cloning toolkit (version 0.92)}.
82. An~Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo~Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, et~al. 2024.
    \newblock Qwen2. 5 technical report.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.15115}. [arXiv:2412.15115](https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15115)
83. Zhen Ye, Zeqian Ju, Haohe Liu, Xu~Tan, Jianyi Chen, Yiwen Lu, Peiwen Sun, Jiahao Pan, Weizhen Bian, Shulin He, et~al. 2024{\natexlab{a}}.
    \newblock Flashspeech: Efficient zero-shot speech synthesis.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Multimedia}, pages 6998--7007.
84. Zhen Ye, Peiwen Sun, Jiahe Lei, Hongzhan Lin, Xu~Tan, Zheqi Dai, Qiuqiang Kong, Jianyi Chen, Jiahao Pan, Qifeng Liu, et~al. 2024{\natexlab{b}}.
    \newblock Codec does matter: Exploring the semantic shortcoming of codec for audio language model.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.17175}. [arXiv:2408.17175](../2024/2408.17175.md)
85. Zhen Ye, Xinfa Zhu, Chi-Min Chan, Xinsheng Wang, Xu~Tan, Jiahe Lei, Yi~Peng, Haohe Liu, Yizhu Jin, Zheqi DAI, et~al. 2025.
    \newblock Llasa: Scaling train-time and inference-time compute for llama-based speech synthesis.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.04128}. [arXiv:2502.04128](./2502.04128.md)
86. Jiahui Yu, Xin Li, Jing~Yu Koh, Han Zhang, Ruoming Pang, James Qin, Alexander Ku, Yuanzhong Xu, Jason Baldridge, and Yonghui Wu. 2021.
    \newblock Vector-quantized image modeling with improved vqgan.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04627}. [arXiv:2110.04627](https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.04627)
87. Heiga Zen, Viet Dang, Rob Clark, Yu~Zhang, Ron~J Weiss, Ye~Jia, Zhifeng Chen, and Yonghui Wu. 2019.
    \newblock Libritts: A corpus derived from librispeech for text-to-speech.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.02882}. [arXiv:1904.02882](https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.02882)
88. Xin Zhang, Dong Zhang, Shimin Li, Yaqian Zhou, and Xipeng Qiu. 2023{\natexlab{a}}.
    \newblock Speechtokenizer: Unified speech tokenizer for speech large language models.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.16692}. [arXiv:2308.16692](../2024/2308.16692.md)
89. Ziqiang Zhang, Long Zhou, Chengyi Wang, Sanyuan Chen, Yu~Wu, Shujie Liu, Zhuo Chen, Yanqing Liu, Huaming Wang, Jinyu Li, et~al. 2023{\natexlab{b}}.
    \newblock Speak foreign languages with your own voice: Cross-lingual neural codec language modeling.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03926}. [arXiv:2303.03926](../2023/2303.03926.md)
90. Jinming Zhao, Tenggan Zhang, Jingwen Hu, Yuchen Liu, Qin Jin, Xinchao Wang, and Haizhou Li. 2022.
    \newblock M3ed: Multi-modal multi-scene multi-label emotional dialogue database.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10237}. [arXiv:2205.10237](https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.10237)
91. Youqiang Zheng, Weiping Tu, Yueteng Kang, Jie Chen, Yike Zhang, Li~Xiao, Yuhong Yang, and Long Ma. 2024.
    \newblock Freecodec: A disentangled neural speech codec with fewer tokens.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.01053}. [arXiv:2412.01053](https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.01053)
92. Kun Zhou, Berrak Sisman, Rui Liu, and Haizhou Li. 2021.
    \newblock Seen and unseen emotional style transfer for voice conversion with a new emotional speech dataset.
    \newblock In \emph{ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 920--924. IEEE.
93. Shuoyi Zhou, Yixuan Zhou, Weiqing Li, Jun Chen, Runchuan Ye, Weihao Wu, Zijian Lin, Shun Lei, and Zhiyong Wu. 2024{\natexlab{a}}.
    \newblock The codec language model-based zero-shot spontaneous style tts system for covoc challenge 2024.
    \newblock In \emph{2024 IEEE 14th International Symposium on Chinese Spoken Language Processing (ISCSLP)}, pages 496--500. IEEE.
94. Yixuan Zhou, Xiaoyu Qin, Zeyu Jin, Shuoyi Zhou, Shun Lei, Songtao Zhou, Zhiyong Wu, and Jia Jia. 2024{\natexlab{b}}.
    \newblock Voxinstruct: Expressive human instruction-to-speech generation with unified multilingual codec language modelling.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Multimedia}, pages 554--563.
95. Xinfa Zhu, Wenjie Tian, Xinsheng Wang, Lei He, Yujia Xiao, Xi~Wang, Xu~Tan, Sheng Zhao, and Lei Xie. 2024.
    \newblock Unistyle: Unified style modeling for speaking style captioning and stylistic speech synthesis.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Multimedia}, pages 7513--7522.
96. Alon Ziv, Itai Gat, Gael~Le Lan, Tal Remez, Felix Kreuk, Alexandre D{\'e}fossez, Jade Copet, Gabriel Synnaeve, and Yossi Adi. 2024.
    \newblock Masked audio generation using a single non-autoregressive transformer.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04577}. [arXiv:2401.04577](https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.04577)
