---
arxiv_id: '2504.07053'
title: 'TASTE: Text-Aligned Speech Tokenization and Embedding for Spoken Language
  Modeling'
authors:
- Liang-Hsuan Tseng
- Yi-Chang Chen
- Kuan-Yi Lee
- Da-Shan Shiu
- Hung-yi Lee
submitted: '2025-04-09'
categories:
- cs.CL
- cs.SD
- eess.AS
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.07053
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 29/86
citations_resolved_at: '2026-07-07T16:04:22+00:00'
references_parsed: 86
arxiv_version: ''
---

# Introduction

Spoken language modeling (SLM) is an intriguing direction nowadays that aims at creating models that can not only listen but also *speak* . Typically, building an SLM requires two stages: first, deriving speech tokenizations; second, training a language model based on the speech tokens. For the speech tokens, previous approaches either apply self-supervised learning (SSL) representations following by discretization techniques  or reuse units from neural codec models like EnCodec and SoundStream . Although autoregressive modeling with these speech tokens shows great potential in text-to-speech (TTS) , previous SLMs that model only speech tokens  have been shown to lack semantic fidelity .

To bridge this gap, one promising direction is to leverage text—which is rich in semantics—during spoken language modeling. TWIST  shows that SLMs can benefit from initializing with text LLMs. Building on this idea, recent work has shifted toward joint text–speech modeling to enhance semantic coherence in generated speech. Such approaches typically adopt a hybrid decoding scheme that generates both text and speech tokens. However, combining the two modalities introduces a length mismatch, since speech token sequences are usually much longer than their textual counterparts. Common remedies include interleaving text and speech tokens  or inserting padding to synchronize sequence lengths , but these solutions rely on additional alignment procedures or heuristic rules, making joint modeling more complex.

As hybrid text–speech decoding becomes the prevailing paradigm for joint SLM , the design of speech tokens should be reconsidered in light of this setting. This motivates the development of more effective joint tokenization methods, which can be derived under the following two considerations: **1)** a speech token should avoid redundantly encoding text content—already captured by the text tokens—and instead focus on conveying paralinguistic information; and **2)** a straightforward one-to-one correspondence between text and speech tokens is preferable, as it allows SLMs to generate a text token and a speech token simultaneously without any heuristics or explicit alignments applied, mitigating the length mismatch issue during the tokenization stage.

<figure id="fig:taste_overview" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figure/TASTE_overview.drawio.pdf" style="width:100.0%" />
<figcaption> <strong>The concept overview.</strong> Conventional methods extract speech tokens solely from speech, inevitably carries overlapped information with text tokens and induces length-mismatch problem when conducting joint text-speech modeling. By taking dual modalities as input, we generate speech tokenization that is aligned with text, facilitating straightforward and effective joint modeling. </figcaption>
</figure>

In this work, we introduce <u>**T**</u>ext-<u>**A**</u>ligned <u>**S**</u>peech <u>**T**</u>okenization and <u>**E**</u>mbedding (TASTE), a special type of joint tokenization tailored for text-speech joint spoken language modeling. By acknowledging that the length mismatch introduces additional complexity in joint modeling, we develop our speech token to be aligned with its corresponding text transcription tokens. To achieve this, we first obtain the textual transcription of a speech with the ASR model; then we derive the speech token based on the transcription through a specialized cross-attention mechanism for speech reconstruction. Note that the full process can be accomplished in an end-to-end manner, with no explicit speech-text alignment required. Unlike previous speech tokens that are developed under a fixed stride with fixed down-sampling rate, our speech token has dynamic frequency as it is text-aligned. Figure <a href="#fig:taste_overview" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:taste_overview">1</a> shows an overall concept of TASTE, illustrating how our joint tokenization allows effective joint modeling.

To evaluate the effectiveness of TASTE, we first conduct extensive experiments on speech reconstruction. Our results on LibriSpeech  show that TASTE not only resynthesizes speech in high quality, but also retains similarity to the original speech. TASTE achieves high-end reconstruction at an extremely low bit rate ($`\sim`$<!-- -->150 bps); while the other comparable methods are often more than thousands of bps. We attribute the efficiency to the involvement of text tokens during encoding and decoding, and our speech tokens focus on carrying paralinguistic information, which is backed up by the demonstration that TASTE allows simple text-aligned speech editing. By exchanging the partial text-aligned speech tokens from two different utterances with the same content, we demonstrate that the paralinguistic information such as duration and tone can be exchanged precisely following the words being exchanged, resulting in natural edited speech.

On the other hand, we demonstrate that TASTE successfully allows effective spoken language modeling. We perform straightforward joint modeling with TASTE under Low-Rank Adaptation . We first perform speech continuation experiments with 3-second speech prompts given. The evaluation is three-fold. We use GPT-4o for evaluating the semantic aspect; UTMOS  for the acoustic aspect; and the human listening test for the general evaluation. Results show that our SLMs not only generates natural, meaningful speech continuations, but also outperforms the other 7B pre-trained SLMs across all the continuation evaluation aspects with 1.3B parameters. We also evaluate our SLMs on two benchmarks, SALMON  and StoryCloze  and our results show that our SLMs achieve comparable performance compared to the other text-speech joint modeling methods. Moreover, we show that our pretrained SLM can perform spoken question answering under the few-shot scenario.

In summary, we derive TASTE, a specialized tokenization approach for text–speech spoken language modeling. By aligning speech tokens with their text counterparts, TASTE provides a simple yet effective form of joint tokenization. Our results highlight joint tokenization as a key factor in joint modeling, offering a new perspective that may foster further research into more effective designs.

# Related Work

Recent SLMs often require speech tokenization to conduct language modeling with the next prediction objective as the text LLMs. Unlike text, the speech signal is continuous and lengthy, making it difficult to derive proper speech tokenization for spoken language modeling. Common approaches may utilize self-supervised learned (SSL) speech models followed by quantization techniques to extract speech tokens . In addition, audio or speech codec models have also been used for tokenization in recent SLMs . These models are designed for resynthesis, where the speech decoders are jointly learned with the encoders.

With speech tokenization, GSLM  first demonstrates the possibility of building an SLM that can generate speech. TWIST  further shows that the SLM can benefit from initialization with the text-only LLM. With regard to the huge success of text-only LLMs, recent work shifts the focus towards joint speech-text modeling . To facilitate joint modeling, Spirit LM  adopts an interleaving strategy; moshi  trains its own tokenizer with a reduced token frequency. Moreover, delayed or sequential generation are introduced for joint modeling .

Despite the increasing demand of joint speech-text modeling, we do not find any work discussing the effectiveness of current speech tokenization for it. However, we have observed that recent work is trying to mitigate the modality gap by reducing the token frequency , conducting an additional training stage for text-speech alignment , or leveraging hidden representations of the ASR encoder . This motivates us to design a speech tokenization that is directly aligned with its text counterpart, tackling the mismatch issue during the tokenization stage.

In TASTE, we utilize a specialized mechanism based on attention to aggregate the encoder representations. We clarify that the text-speech cross-attention mechanism has also been used for fine-grained control of TTS. More specifically,  propose content-style cross-attention to indicate their text-speech cross-attention mechanism that enables style transfer in TTS. Although both utilize a specialized text-speech cross-attention mechanism, the design choices and problem formulations are completely different. We attribute of our main novelty to inventing a text-aligned speech tokenization and embedding for joint spoken language modeling, and the text-speech cross-attention mechanism is considered and shown to be a clean and effective way of achieving it.

# Method

We propose text-aligned speech tokenization and embedding (TASTE) to facilitate effective joint speech-text spoken language modeling. Here, we first introduce how we derive our joint tokenization in Section <a href="#subsec:building_taste" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsec:building_taste">3.1</a>, and then discuss how we use TASTE for spoken language modeling (§ <a href="#subsec:taste_for_spoken_language_modeling" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsec:taste_for_spoken_language_modeling">3.2</a>).

## Building TASTE

As depicted in Figure <a href="#fig:taste_method_3-1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:taste_method_3-1">2</a>, TASTE is comprised of the two main components: the text-aligned speech tokenizer (§ <a href="#subsubsec:taste_speech_tokenizer" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsubsec:taste_speech_tokenizer">3.1.1</a>) that produces the text-aligned speech tokenization; and the speech decoder (§ <a href="#subsubsec:taste_speech_decoder" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsubsec:taste_speech_decoder">3.1.2</a>) to *reconstruct* speech based on the text token and the TASTE speech token aligned with it. The training objective of speech reconstruction is described in Section <a href="#subsubsec:training_objective" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsubsec:training_objective">3.1.3</a>.

<figure id="fig:taste_method_3-1" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figure/TASTE_method_3-1_new.drawio.pdf" style="width:100.0%" />
<figcaption><strong>The overall framework of our text-aligned speech tokenization and embedding.</strong> The left side illustrate the process of obtaining the TASTE tokenization <span class="math inline">$\hat{\bm{z}}$</span>, detailed in Section <a href="#subsubsec:taste_speech_tokenizer" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsubsec:taste_speech_tokenizer">3.1.1</a>; while the right side demonstrate how we reconstruct the speech with TASTE (Section <a href="#subsubsec:taste_speech_decoder" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsubsec:taste_speech_decoder">3.1.2</a>). The training objective for our speech reconstruction is discussed in Section <a href="#subsubsec:training_objective" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsubsec:training_objective">3.1.3</a>. </figcaption>
</figure>

### TASTE Speech Tokenizer

In TASTE, the speech tokenizer, denoted as $`\mathrm{Tokenizer}(\cdot)`$, is designed to generate the text-aligned speech tokenization and embedding with the speech-text pair $`X=(\bm{u}, \bm{v})`$ taken as input, where $`\bm{v}`$ represents the textual transcription of the speech utterance $`\bm{u}`$, which can be easily obtained through an automatic speech recognition (ASR) system. Recent developments in robust and efficient ASR  allow us to focus on discussing how to derive the text-aligned speech token effectively by assuming that $`\bm{v}`$ is of sufficient quality. The TASTE speech tokenizer is composed of three major components: an *encoder*, an *aggregator*, and a *quantizer*.

The encoder $`\mathrm{Encoder}(\cdot)`$ contains $`L`$ layers of Transformer  encoder blocks and is used to extract high-dimensional speech representation. We employ the pre-trained Whisper ASR encoder  as our speech encoder, and it is frozen during training. For an input speech utterance $`\bm{u}`$, the encoder produces a sequence of hidden states from each layer $`[\bm{h}^{(1)}, \bm{h}^{(2)}, \ldots, \bm{h}^{(L)}]`$. In our experiments, we retain the *last* hidden representation $`\bm{h}^{(L)}`$ and the *shallow* representation $`\bm{h}^{(l)}`$ from the first half of the hidden representations of the encoder:
``` math
{\bm{h}^{(L)}, \bm{h}^{(l)}} \ 
    = \mathrm{Encoder}( \bm{u} ), 
    \quad\text{ where }
     1 \leq l \leq \bigl\lfloor\tfrac{L}{2}\bigr\rfloor.
```
Note that both of the hidden representations $`\bm{h}^{(L)}, \bm{h}^{(l)} \in \mathbb{R}^{T \times d_h}`$ have their length denoted as $`T`$ and the hidden dimension indicated by $`d_{h}`$.

The hidden representations extracted from the encoder are then passed to the *aggregator*. The aggregator is designed to obtain a more compressed speech representation $`\bm{z}`$ that is aligned in length with the text transcription $`\bm{v}`$. Consider that $`\bm{v}=[v_1, v_2, \ldots, v_N], v_i \in \mathbb{V}`$ is a text token sequence with length $`N`$, the input and output of the aggregator can be denoted as:
``` math
\bm{z} = \mathrm{Aggregator}(\bm{v}, \bm{h}^{(L)}, \bm{h}^{(l)}), 
    % \quad 
    \text{ where }
    \bm{z} \in \mathbb{R}^{N \times d_z}, 
    \bm{v} \in \mathbb{V}^{N},
    \text{ and }
    \bm{h}^{(L)}, \bm{h}^{(l)} \in \mathbb{R}^{T \times d_h}.
```
To make the speech representation $`\bm{z}`$ text-aligned, we conduct a simple yet effective attention mechanism based on the three inputs. Consider that the original multi-head attention in  is denoted as $`\mathrm{MultiHead}(Q, K, V)`$, our first layer attention in the aggregator takes:
``` math
{Q}= \text{text transcription } \bm{v}, \quad 
    {K}= \text{encoder last hidden } \bm{h}^{(L)}, 
    \quad
    {V}= \text{encoder shallow hidden } \bm{h}^{(l)}.
```
By doing so, the length of our first multi-head attention output should follow the text transcription $`\bm{v}`$. Note that the query of the following layers becomes the output from the previous layer. In addition, intuitions of using the encoder’s last hidden representation as keys, and the shallow hidden representation as values can be described as follows: **1)** In Transformer-based ASR models, the last hidden states often encode rich speech-text alignment cues; sometimes the cross-attention weight matrices can even be exploited as soft word-alignment maps . **2)** The shallow representation has been shown to support high-quality speech reconstruction even when the quantization is applied . Based on the above observations, we design our aggregator that can use the soft attention maps obtained from the last encoder representations and the text transcriptions, to aggregate the shallow encoder representations that have been shown to be beneficial for high-end speech reconstruction.

After getting the text-aligned representation, the quantizer $`\mathrm{Quantizer}(\cdot)`$ is adopted to discretize the text-aligned representation. We use the residual vector quantization (RVQ) to allow coarse-to-fine quantization. Given the text-aligned speech representation $`\bm{z}`$ and the quantizer containing $`R`$ residual vector quantization layers, we generate:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\label{eq:quantizer}
    \bm{q}, \hat{\bm{z}} = \mathrm{Quantizer}(\bm{z}), 
    \text{ \qquad } 
    \bm{q}=[\bm{q}^{(1)}, \bm{q}^{(2)}, \ldots, \bm{q}^{(R)}], \quad
    \hat{\bm{z}}=\sum^{R}_{r=1}\hat{\bm{z}}^{(r)}
\end{equation}
```
where each $`\bm{q}^{(r)} \in \mathbb{C}^{N}`$ denotes the $`r`$-th layer code sequence with code set $`\mathbb{C}`$; and the quantized embedding $`\hat{\bm{z}}`$ to be the summation over each layer of the codebook vectors. Note that both of the code sequence and the quantized speech embedding $`\hat{\bm{z}}`$ are text-aligned, with the lengths to be $`N`$.

### TASTE Speech Decoder

The speech decoder aims to perform speech reconstruction conditioned on the text token sequence and the text-aligned speech tokenization. As shown in Figure <a href="#fig:taste_method_3-1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:taste_method_3-1">2</a>, the text and speech tokens are aligned in lengths and being fed into the speech decoder after weighted sum in an autoregressive manner. The speech decoder is composed of the two components: the unit decoder and the unit-to-speech vocoder.

The unit decoder $`\mathrm{UnitDecoder}(\cdot)`$ is a Transformer-based decoder that takes the text token sequence $`\bm{v}`$ and the aligned speech embedding $`\hat{\bm{z}}`$ as condition and predicts the speech unit $`\bm{y}`$ for reconstruction:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\label{eq:unit_decoder}
    \bm{y} = \mathrm{UnitDecoder}(\hat{\bm{z}}, \bm{v}).
\end{equation}
```
Note that the additional speaker embedding is also taken as input to facilitate global speaker voice control in our spoken language models . After we generating the speech unit $`\bm{y}`$, we use a unit-to-speech vocoder to further transform the unit into the reconstructed speech.

### Training Objective

Similar to other reconstruction-based speech tokens , we derive TASTE by training it for speech resynthesis. To achieve this, we extract the speech unit $`\bm{y}^{\text{target}}`$ with length $`T'`$ from the original speech $`u`$ as the target unit for our speech tokenizer and speech decoder. Given the text transcription $`\bm{v}`$, the TASTE speech embedding $`\hat{\bm{z}}`$, and the unit from the original speech $`\bm{y}^{\text{target}}`$ as the target, the speech reconstruction through the tokenizer and the unit decoder parametrized by $`\theta`$ under the next prediction schema can be considered as minimizing the cross-entropy loss below:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\begin{aligned}
    \mathcal{L}_{\text{ce}}(\theta) = \frac{1}{|T'|} \sum_{t=1}^{T'} - \text{log } p_{\theta}({y}^{\text{target}}_t \big| \hat{\bm{z}} , \bm{v}; \bm{y}^{\text{target}}_{<t})
\end{aligned}
\end{equation}
```
On the other hand, we employ the quantization loss as well to tokenize the continuous representation $`\bm{z}`$ extracted from the encoder-aggregator. Following prior works , given that $`\bm{z}^{(r)}`$ is the $`r`$-th residual and $`\hat{\bm{z}}^{(r)}`$ indicates the $`r`$-th quantized residual, the the commitment loss is defined as:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\begin{aligned}
    \mathcal{L}_{\text{rvq}}(\theta) = \sum_{r=1}^R \| \bm{z}^{(r)} - \hat{\bm{z}}^{(r)} \|.
\end{aligned}
\end{equation}
```
By summation over both losses, we formulate the overall loss for training TASTE as:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\begin{aligned}
    \mathcal{L}_{\text{taste}} = \mathcal{L}_{\text{ce}} +  \mathcal{L}_{\text{rvq}} \text{.}
\end{aligned}
\end{equation}
```

## TASTE for Spoken Language Modeling

Next, we describe how we conduct effective spoken language modeling with TASTE. Following previous work , we perform pre-training on speech data. The text transcription of the speech data is also used for joint speech-text pre-training of our text-aligned spoken language model (TASLM). Since TASTE tokenization already aligns with the text token sequence, we can conduct a straightforward joint modeling, as illustrated in Figure <a href="#fig:taste_overview" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:taste_overview">1</a>. To demonstrate the robustness of TASTE, we perform two types of text-aligned spoken language modeling. First, we build $`\rm{TASLM}_\text{token}`$ over our text-aligned speech **token** $`\bm{q}`$, discussed in Section <a href="#subsubsec:modeling_taste_token" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsubsec:modeling_taste_token">3.2.1</a>. Then, we show how we build $`\rm{TASLM}_{\text{emb}}`$ with our text-aligned speech **embedding** $`\hat{\bm{z}}`$, detailed in Section <a href="#subsubsec:modeling_taste_embedding" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsubsec:modeling_taste_embedding">3.2.2</a>.

### Modeling TASTE Token

As our speech tokens derived from the RVQ quantizer contain $`R`$ layers of codes, we employ $`R`$ linear heads for multi-head prediction in our $`\rm{TASLM}_\text{token}`$. Namely, the $`\rm{TASLM}_\text{token}`$ simultaneously predicts the next text token and the corresponding $`R`$ layers of speech tokens in each step. The overall training objective follows the original next token prediction scheme, but with multiple predictions across modalities at each step. Specifically, given the text transcription $`\bm{v}`$ and $`R`$ layers of quantized RVQ codes $`\bm{q}`$, the multi-head next-token prediction training objective can be formulated as:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\begin{aligned}
    \mathcal{L}_{\text{token}}(\phi) = 
    \frac{1}{|N|} \sum_{i=1}^{N} \Bigl( 
    -\text{log } p^{\text{text}}_{\phi}\bigl({v}_{i} \big| \bm{v}_{<i}, \bm{q}_{<i} \bigr) + 
    \sum_{r=1}^{R} - \text{log } p^{\text{(r)}}_{\phi} \big({q}^{\text{(r)}}_i \big| \bm{v}_{<i}, \bm{q}_{<i} \bigr)  
    \Bigr), 
\end{aligned}
\end{equation}
```
with $`\phi`$ represents the parameter of the $`\mathrm{TASLM}_{\text{token}}`$, and $`p^{(r)}`$ is the $`r`$-th probability prediction for the $`r`$-th RVQ code. As for inference, we directly sample the codes and the text simultaneously, and transform the codes into the corresponding embedding for the speech decoder to generate speech.

### Modeling TASTE Embedding

Besides the token code sets, recent progress on latent modeling  motivates us to conduct experiments on modeling our text-aligned speech embedding. Referencing MELLE , we employ a linear layer that predicts the mean vector $`\mu_i`$ and a log-magnitude variance vector $`\text{log }\sigma^2_i`$, where $`i`$ indicates the $`i`$-th frame of the sequence. And the final predicted latent of frame $`i`$ is denoted as $`e_i = \mu_i + \sigma_i \odot \epsilon`$, where $`\epsilon \sim \mathcal{N}(0, I)`$. Following MELLE, the straight-through estimator is applied to allow gradients to back-propagate properly during training.

To facilitate latent prediction, we apply the regularization loss and the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence loss druing training, which is described as follows:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\begin{aligned}
    \mathcal{L}_{\text{reg}}(\psi) = 
    \| \bm{e}_{\psi} - \hat{\bm{z}} \|^2_2, \quad
    \mathcal{L}_{\text{KL}} = \frac{1}{2} \sum^{N}_{i=1} \sum^{d_{z}}_{j=1} \bigl(\sigma_i[j] + (\mu_i[j]-\hat{z}_i[j])^2) -1 -\text{log } \sigma^2_i[j]\bigl), \\
\end{aligned}
\end{equation}
```
where $`\psi`$ indicates the parameter of $`\mathrm{TASLM}_{\text{emb}}`$, and $`d_z`$ is the dimension of our text-aligned embedding $`\hat{\bm{z}}`$. The regularization loss $`\mathcal{L}_{\text{reg}}`$ is adopted to predict close latent towards the target embedding $`\hat{\bm{z}}`$. The KL divergence loss calculates the KL divergence between the predicted latent distribution and the target distribution. Following MELLE, we select the target distribution to be $`\mathcal{N}({\hat{\bm{z}}}_i, I)`$. This allows simplification of $`\mathcal{L}_{\text{KL}}`$, which can then be approximated with the predicted vectors $`\mu_i, \sigma_i, \text{and the target embedding } \hat{\bm{z}}_i`$. Finally, the overall loss along with the text loss is described as:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\begin{aligned}
    \mathcal{L}_{\text{emb}}(\psi) = \lambda_{\text{reg}} \cdot \mathcal{L}_{\text{reg}} + \lambda_{\text{KL}} \cdot \mathcal{L}_{\text{KL}} + \frac{1}{|N|} \sum_{i=1}^{N}  
    -\text{log } p^{\text{text}}_{\psi}\bigl({v}_{i} \big| \bm{v}_{<i}, \hat{\bm{z}}_{<i} \bigr), 
\end{aligned}
\end{equation}
```
where $`\lambda_{\text{reg}}, \lambda_{\text{KL}}`$ to be the weighted coefficients of the two losses, respectively.

# Experiment Setup

#### Model Configuration

For our TASTE speech tokenizer, we initialize our encoder from Whisper . By doing so, we can reduce computational cost between obtaining the ASR transcription and extracting the TASTE tokenization with the TASTE encoder frozen during training. On the other hand, we use the S3 token from  as the target unit for speech reconstruction. Since their speech tokenization facilitates additional speaker embedding, we follow the same procedure to obtain one. Adding speaker embedding allows global speaker voice control, which is a reasonable and useful scenario for spoken language models. The unit-to-speech vocoder is comprised of a flow model  and a HifiGAN. We use the published pre-trained ones from  , and they are not involved in our training. For the quantizer, we set the RVQ layer $`R=4`$, the codebook size $`512`$, and the codebook dimension to be $`256`$. For the spoken language modeling, we follow previous work  and initialize our spoken language model from a text LLM. However, this introduces the vocabulary mismatch problem between the ASR and LLM. We resolve this issue by using word-level TASTE tokenization and embedding, which is detailed in Appendix <a href="#subsec:tackling_the_vocabulary_mismatch" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsec:tackling_the_vocabulary_mismatch">7.4</a>. Moreover, we conduct LoRA fine-tuning of our TASLMs, with hyperparameters rank $`r=64`$ and $`\alpha=128`$.

#### Dataset

We use two datasets–*Emilia* and *LibriTTS*–as our training datasets. Emilia  is an in-the-wild dataset where the speech is web-scaled and the transcriptions are pseudo-labeled. We use only the English subset of this multi-lingual corpus, which is about 40,000 hours. LibriTTS  is a reading-style corpus based on LibriSpeech . We use all the training splits in LibriTTS for training, which is approximately 600 hours of speech. In addition, the *test-clean* split in LibriSpeech is used for evaluation purposes for our TASTE tokenizer and TASLMs.

# Result

We separate our experimental results into two parts. Section <a href="#subsec:taste_main_results" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsec:taste_main_results">5.1</a> discusses how TASTE strikes a good reconstruction quality while enables effective joint spoken language modeling; while Seciton <a href="#subsec:taste_additional_results" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsec:taste_additional_results">5.2</a> presents the additional results and ablation study of our joint tokenization and text-aligned SLM.

## Main Results

To demonstrate the benefits of our joint tokenization, we first evaluate the performance of TASTE on speech reconstruction; then introduce how it allows effective spoken language modeling. For simplicity, the evaluation metrics are introduced within each section.

### TASTE for Speech Reconstruction

#### Evaluation

We evaluate our joint tokenization on two aspects: **<span class="smallcaps">Quality</span>** and **<span class="smallcaps">Similarity</span>**. For **<span class="smallcaps">Quality</span>** assessment, we use ASR-WER, UTMOS , and DNS-MOS  as our metrics for evaluation. In ASR-WER, we use HuBERT-Large  as the ASR model to transcribe the reconstructed speech, and then calculate the word-error rate (WER) on the transcription. [^1] UTMOS and DNS-MOS are both neural-based MOS predictors. While both evaluate the speech quality, the design purpose of DNS-MOS makes it more suitable for evaluation regarding the noise levels. For **<span class="smallcaps">Similarity</span>** assessment, we measure ViSQOL, duration consistency (Drtn. Con.), speaker similarity (Spkr. Sim.), and the MUSHRA human listening test score. ViSQOL is a production-ready tool that predicts speech quality via spectro-temporal image similarity comparisons. For the duration consistency, we first get the word-level alignment of the transcriptions of the original and the reconstructed speech using Montreal Forced Aligner ; then we calculate if the duration between each of the same words is matched under a preset tolerance window, which is set to 50 milliseconds. In the MUSHRA human listening test, we follow the original protocal  to instruct evaluators to rate similarity and quality on a scale of 1 to 100 with reference given.

<div class="adjustbox">

width=, center

<div id="tab:taste_tokenization_main">

<table>
<caption> <strong>The speech tokenization evaluation results</strong> on the <em>test-clean</em> split of LibriSpeech. The evaluation is separated into the <strong><span class="smallcaps">Quality</span></strong> and the <strong><span class="smallcaps">Similarity</span></strong> assessments, as introduced in Section <a href="#subsubsec:speech_reconstruction_result" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsubsec:speech_reconstruction_result">5.1.1</a>. We use <span>gray text</span> to indicate the worst-performing methods in each metric. Freq. indicates the number of tokens per second. All reported results already account for the effect of ASR errors whenever textual transcriptions are involved (Text-only and TASTE). </caption>
<thead>
<tr>
<th style="text-align: left;">Method</th>
<th style="text-align: right;">Freq.</th>
<th style="text-align: right;">Bitrate</th>
<th colspan="3" style="text-align: center;"><strong><span class="smallcaps">Quality</span></strong></th>
<th colspan="4" style="text-align: center;"><strong><span class="smallcaps">Similarity</span></strong></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"><span>4-6</span> (lr)<span>7-10</span></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">WER <span class="math inline">↓</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">UTMOS</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">DNSMOS</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">ViSQOL</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Drtn. Con.</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Spkr. Sim.</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">MUSHRA</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Ground Truth</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">16k</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">256k</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.1%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.09</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.84</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">76.6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2" style="text-align: left;">Encodec<span class="math inline"><sup><em>α</em></sup></span></td>
<td style="text-align: right;">75</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">1500</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5.1%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.58</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.26</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.46</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.94</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.63</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">75</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">3000</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.6%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.35</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.48</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.81</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.96</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.78</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span>25.6</span></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;">50</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">500</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5.2%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span>1.27</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span>2.99</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.80</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.94</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span>0.35</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">SpeechTokenizer<span class="math inline"><sup><em>β</em></sup></span></td>
<td style="text-align: right;">50</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">2000</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.0%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.56</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.60</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.65</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.97</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.80</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">53.9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;">50</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">4000</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.5%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.90</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.76</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.03</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.98</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.92</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Mimi<span class="math inline"><sup><em>γ</em></sup></span></td>
<td style="text-align: right;">12.5</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">1000</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.1%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.60</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.60</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.62</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.96</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.82</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">67.6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">S3 token<span class="math inline"><sup><em>θ</em></sup></span> (topline)</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">25</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">600</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.0%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.18</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.90</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.30</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.96</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.82</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">70.2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Text-only (baseline)</td>
<td style="text-align: right;"><span class="math inline">∼</span>3</td>
<td style="text-align: right;"><span class="math inline">∼</span>50</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span>5.9%</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>4.31</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>4.11</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span>2.44</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span>0.57</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.78</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">42.6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">TASTE (ours)</td>
<td style="text-align: right;"><strong><span class="math inline">∼</span>3</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"><strong><span class="math inline">∼</span>150</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.4%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><u>4.29</u></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><u>4.10</u></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.05</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.91</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.80</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">68.3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="10" style="text-align: left;"><span class="math inline"><sup><em>α</em></sup></span> <span class="citation" data-cites="encodec"></span>, <span class="math inline"><sup><em>β</em></sup></span> <span class="citation" data-cites="speechtokenizer"></span>, <span class="math inline"><sup><em>γ</em></sup></span> <span class="citation" data-cites="moshi"></span>, <span class="math inline"><sup><em>θ</em></sup></span> <span class="citation" data-cites="cosyvoice"></span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

</div>

<span id="tab:taste_tokenization_main" label="tab:taste_tokenization_main"></span>

#### Results Analysis

Table <a href="#tab:taste_tokenization_main" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:taste_tokenization_main">1</a> reports the results of speech reconstruction on LibriSpeech. To better understand the effectiveness of TASTE, we highlight three main observations. **1)** Since our tokens are text-aligned, TASTE operates at the lowest frequency and bitrate among all tokenization methods. We estimate these dynamic values by counting the total number of tokens and accumulating the duration over the testing set. **2)** Despite this extremely low bitrate, TASTE achieves on-par or even superior performance to higher-bitrate methods in the quality assessment. In particular, TASTE yields lower ASR-WER than the text-only baseline, which we attribute to speech tokens carrying paralinguistic information that improves the naturalness of reconstructed speech. **3)** In terms of similarity, TASTE performs comparably to high-bitrate, fixed down-sampling methods across multiple metrics. The inferior results on ViSQOL can be partly attributed to our use of a flow-based vocoder, as both TASTE and the S3 token topline exhibit weaker ViSQOL performance—a phenomenon also observed in . This degradation on ViSQOL is not reflected in the MUSHRA listening test, where TASTE attains competitive perceptual quality and similarity from a human perspective. In general, TASTE significantly outperforms the text-only baseline, confirming that it carries sufficient paralinguistic information to allow high-quality speech reconstruction.

### TASTE for Spoken Language Modeling

<div class="adjustbox">

width=, center

<div id="tab:taslm_continuation_results">

<table>
<caption> <strong>Pretrained SLM speech continuation and likelihood-based next-speech selection results.</strong> The superscripts at the bottom of the table indicate the base models used by each SLM, indicated by superscripts. Cascade models refer to the pipeline with ASR <span class="citation" data-cites="whisper"></span>, text continuation by LMs <span class="citation" data-cites="llama"></span>, and TTS <span class="citation" data-cites="cosyvoice"></span>. This allow us to evaluate SLMs with cascade models in continuation perspective. </caption>
<thead>
<tr>
<th style="text-align: left;">Method</th>
<th style="text-align: center;">Finetuned / base</th>
<th colspan="3" style="text-align: center;"><strong><span class="smallcaps">Continuation</span></strong></th>
<th colspan="3" style="text-align: center;"><strong><span class="smallcaps">Likelihood</span></strong></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"><span>3-5</span> (lr)<span>6-8</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">parameters</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">GPT-4o</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">UTMOS</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Human</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">SALMON</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">StoryCloze</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Overall</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align: left;"><em>Cascade</em></td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Cascade (LLaMA3.2-1B<span class="math inline"><sup><em>α</em></sup></span>)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.15</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>4.25</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>4.00</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Cascade (LLaMA2-7B<span class="math inline"><sup><em>β</em></sup></span>)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>3.43</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>4.25</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.98</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align: left;"><em>Spoken LMs</em></td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">TWIST 1.3B <span class="citation" data-cites="twist"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.3B / 1.3B<span class="math inline"><sup><em>θ</em></sup></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.48</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.25</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.95</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">62.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">61.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">62.0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">TWIST 7B <span class="citation" data-cites="twist"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">   7B /    7B<span class="math inline"><sup><em>γ</em></sup></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.44</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.27</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.04</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">63.4</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">64.7</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">64.1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Spirit LM <span class="citation" data-cites="spiritlm"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">   7B /    7B<span class="math inline"><sup><em>β</em></sup></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.79</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.41</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.38</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">59.1</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">72.0</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">65.6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Spirit LM Expr. <span class="citation" data-cites="spiritlm"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">   7B /    7B<span class="math inline"><sup><em>β</em></sup></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.90</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.40</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.41</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>69.0</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">66.2</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">67.6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Baseline (S3 token)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">45M / 1.3B<span class="math inline"><sup><em>α</em></sup></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.37</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.04</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.84</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">50.2</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">58.7</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">54.5</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">TASLM 1B (token)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">45M / 1.3B<span class="math inline"><sup><em>α</em></sup></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.08</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.07</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.93</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">60.8</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">76.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>68.7</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">TASLM 1B (embed.)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">45M / 1.3B<span class="math inline"><sup><em>α</em></sup></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>3.16</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>4.22</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>4.16</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">57.7</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>76.7</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">67.2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="7" style="text-align: left;">Base models: <span class="math inline"><sup><em>α</em></sup></span>LLaMA3.2-1B, <span class="math inline"><sup><em>β</em></sup></span>LLaMA2-7B, <span class="math inline"><sup><em>γ</em></sup></span>LLaMA-7B, <span class="math inline"><sup><em>θ</em></sup></span>OPT-1.3B</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

</div>

<span id="tab:taslm_continuation_results" label="tab:taslm_continuation_results"></span>

TASTE is designed specifically to enable effective joint spoken language modeling (SLM). To examine its effectiveness, we train pretrained SLMs on top of TASTE following the methodology in Section <a href="#subsec:taste_for_spoken_language_modeling" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsec:taste_for_spoken_language_modeling">3.2</a>. In line with prior work , we evaluate these models from two perspectives: speech continuation evaluation and likelihood-based evaluation.

#### Speech Continuation Evaluation

First, each pretrained SLM is conditioned on 3-second speech segments from LibriSpeech *test-clean* to generate speech continuations under their own decoding schemes, following . The generated continuations are then evaluated along two main aspects: *semantic coherence* and *speech naturalness*. For the semantic aspect, we transcribe the continuations using ASR and ask GPT-4o to assign MOS scores based on their coherence. For the speech naturalness aspect, we compute UTMOS as an objective score of speech quality. In addition, human evaluators provide an overall MOS score that jointly considers both coherence and naturalness. The detailed instructions given to GPT-4o and human evaluators are provided in Appendix <a href="#subsubsec:appendix_gpt4o_eval" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsubsec:appendix_gpt4o_eval">7.3.2</a>.

#### Likelihood-Based Evaluation

Following previous work , we also evaluate the SLMs through likelihood-based benchmarks, where the accuracy score is based on whether the pretrained SLM chooses the correct continuation from the two given speech utterances based on its output likelihoods. We adopt two established benchmarks SALMON  and spoken StoryCloze , which covers the acoustic aspect and the semantic aspect, respectively. Since both benchmarks contain multiple tasks, we report the average accuracy across these tasks within each benchmark for simplicity. The detailed results are in Appendix <a href="#subsubsec:appendix:details_on_salmon_and_storycloze" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsubsec:appendix:details_on_salmon_and_storycloze">7.1.5</a> for the interested readers. We also report the mean of the SALMON and StoryCloze as an overall assessment for both aspects.

#### Results Analysis

The results of TASLM compared to other pre-trained SLMs are shown in Table <a href="#tab:taslm_continuation_results" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:taslm_continuation_results">2</a>, and three main advantages can be observed. **1)** Compared to other pretrained SLMs, TASLM achieves substantially better performance on speech continuation across both human and machine evaluations, while also performing competitively on the likelihood-based benchmarks. Notably, this is achieved with only LoRA finetuning on a relatively small 1.3B base language model, illustrating the effectiveness of TASTE for joint modeling. **2)** Compared to cascade models with the same base LM, our $`\rm{TASLM}_\text{emb}`$ achieves comparable scores on GPT-4o but higher human MOS. This indicates that its generated speech is more natural than cascade systems that rely solely on TTS during continuation. TASLM is the only SLM that not only maintains but even surpasses the performance of its corresponding text-based model, highlighting the importance of speech token modeling. **3)** Directly using the S3 token for joint modeling following  yields poor performance across *all* aspects, even though it surpasses TASTE in speech reconstruction. This shows that while reconstruction quality is critical, it is not the sole consideration in tokenization for spoken language modeling. Taken together, these results highlight the central contribution of TASTE: **building a joint tokenization that facilitates more effective joint spoken language modeling**.

## Additional Results

<figure id="fig:taste_speech_editing" data-latex-placement="!b">
<embed src="figure/TASTE_speech_editing.drawio_new.pdf" />
<figcaption> <strong>An illustration of TASTE for text-aligned speech editing.</strong> On the left shows the process of our text-aligned speech editing. We first extract the TASTE tokens; swap the tokens partially; and then decode the edited TASTE tokens into edited speech. On the right shows an example visualization. Only the durations of the words with exchanged TASTE tokens show significant difference. </figcaption>
</figure>

### TASTE for Text-Aligned Speech Editing

Beyond the main results presented above, we report several intriguing observations that further showcase the versatility of TASTE. The first is that TASTE naturally enables *text-aligned speech editing*, as illustrated in Figure <a href="#fig:taste_speech_editing" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:taste_speech_editing">3</a>. Suppose we have two utterances with the same transcript but different paralinguistic characteristics. By exchanging their TASTE token sequences word by word, we ask whether the associated paralinguistic traits are transferred as well. To make the effect clear, we select utterances that differ mainly in speaking rate and examine duration changes using MFA . As illustrated in Figure <a href="#fig:taste_speech_editing" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:taste_speech_editing">3</a>, swapping tokens at specific word positions causes the corresponding words to exhibit clear duration shifts, while untouched words preserve their original timing—evidence that TASTE enables precise, text-aligned manipulation. This observation also echoes our design principle introduced in Section <a href="#sec:introduction" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:introduction">1</a>: a speech token should avoid redundantly encoding text content and instead concentrate on conveying paralinguistic information. Additional examples targeting other paralinguistic dimensions are provided on our demo page.

<div class="minipage">

<div id="tab:taste_modules_ablation">

<table>
<caption><strong>Ablation study on the effects of each module in TASTE speech tokenizer.</strong> Enc. is <em>encoder</em>, Agg. is <em>aggregator</em>, and Quan. is <em>quantizer</em>. *: top-5 accuracy. </caption>
<thead>
<tr>
<th style="text-align: left;">Method</th>
<th style="text-align: center;">Mode</th>
<th style="text-align: center;">Web Q.</th>
<th style="text-align: center;">LLaMA-Q.</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Mini-Omni 0.5B(T<span class="math inline">$\xrightarrow{}$</span>T)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">T</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">21.3</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">39.0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Mini-Omni 0.5B</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">T+S</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">11.6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Helium 7B (text)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">T</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">32.3</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">75.0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Moshi 7B</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">T+S</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">26.6</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">62.3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">LLaMA3.1-8B-Instruct</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">T</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">60.4</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">71.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Llama-Omni-8B</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">T+S</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">35.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">67.3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">LLaMA3.2-1B<span class="math inline"><sup>†</sup></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">T</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">24.0</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">51.0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">TASLM 1B (embed.)<span class="math inline"><sup>†</sup></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">T+S</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">27.1</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">57.6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align: left;"><span class="math inline"><sup>†</sup></span> We apply few-shot learning to facilitate question answering.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span id="tab:taslm_qa_results" label="tab:taslm_qa_results"></span>

</div>

<div class="minipage">

<div id="tab:taste_modules_ablation">

| Modules              |               Freq. | S3 token Acc.\* |
|:---------------------|--------------------:|:---------------:|
| Enc.                 |                50Hz |      0.98       |
| Enc. + Agg.          | $`\sim`$<!-- -->3Hz |      0.88       |
| Enc. + Agg. + Quan.  | $`\sim`$<!-- -->3Hz |      0.76       |
| Enc. (*last*)        |                50Hz |      0.84       |
| Enc. + Agg. (*last*) | $`\sim`$<!-- -->3Hz |      0.78       |
| Text-only            | $`\sim`$<!-- -->3Hz |      0.65       |

**Ablation study on the effects of each module in TASTE speech tokenizer.** Enc. is *encoder*, Agg. is *aggregator*, and Quan. is *quantizer*. \*: top-5 accuracy.

</div>

<span id="tab:taste_modules_ablation" label="tab:taste_modules_ablation"></span>

</div>

### TASLM for Spoken Question Answering

Next, we intriguingly find out that our TASLM exhibits spoken QA ability under few-shot scenario . We are the only pretrained SLM in Table <a href="#tab:taslm_continuation_results" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:taslm_continuation_results">2</a> that exhibits this capability. As a result, we compare it against other instruction-finetuned joint SLMs in Table <a href="#tab:taslm_qa_results" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:taslm_qa_results">[tab:taslm_qa_results]</a> to better understand the performance. We use two spoken question answering benchmarks, Web Questions  and LLaMA-Questions , following . We report the accuracy of answer containment. To more comprehensively assess the impact of adding speech, we also report the performance of each system’s underlying base text LLM. Notably, TASLM is the only approach that preserves its base text LLM’s performance. We attribute this to TASTE’s joint tokenization strategy. Specifically, we employ a straightforward one-to-one mapping between text and speech tokens, which enables simple and effective joint modeling.

### Ablation Study on TASTE Speech Tokenizer

We run an ablation on TASTE speech tokenizer and use S3 token top-5 reconstruction accuracy as a proxy for information retention. Table <a href="#tab:taste_modules_ablation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:taste_modules_ablation">4</a> first covers the module-wise ablations of our *encoder*, *aggregator*, and *quantizer*. The *aggregator* sharply reduces token rate with only a small drop in accuracy. Adding the *quantizer* lowers accuracy further, but performance is still well above the text-only baseline. Secondly, we show that using only the *last* hidden state $`\mathbf{h}^{(L)}`$ performs worse than using the *shallow* hidden states $`\mathbf{h}^{(l)}`$ (as values for the aggregator), confirming our design choice.

# Conclusion

In this work, we propose Text-Aligned Speech Tokenization and Embedding (TASTE), to facilitate joint text-speech spoken language modeling. By aggregating proper encoder representation through the specialized cross-attention mechanism and taking the ASR model as initialization, we make the speech tokenization text-aligned in an end-to-end manner with no explicit word alignment required. With our text-aligned speech tokenization and embedding, joint text-speech modeling becomes straightforward and effective. We conduct extensive experiments demonstrating the benefits of developing a joint tokenization tailored for spoken language modeling. We anticipate that these findings encourage further research on more effective joint tokenization for generative modeling.

#### Limitation

Several limitations of our current work suggest promising avenues for future development. First, while our pretrained spoken language model generates high-quality audio continuations, it lacks mechanisms for turn-taking and instruction following; developing a dialogue system is a practical next step. Second, TASTE has so far been evaluated on English; confirming its generalizability across other languages remains future work. Third, our tokenization method is tailored for joint SLMs, and its applicability to other generative tasks remains underexplored. Fourth, our pipeline currently focuses on single-speaker speech with lexical content and does not explicitly handle multi-speaker, overlapping, or non-lexical events (*e.g.*, laughter, coughing). Future work could support these capabilities by incorporating target speech extraction  and non-lexical event tags. Finally, system latency and streaming performance are yet to be optimized for real-time applications. Overall, none of these limitations is a fundamental barrier; rather, they are natural extensions and research targets that will further enhance the versatility of TASTE framework.

#### Ethics Statement

TASTE enables the efficient development of spoken language models. It lowers the barrier to building speech systems and improves the accessibility and convenience of human–computer interaction. At the same time, it raises security concerns: systems built with TASTE can more easily mimic a person’s voice and synthesize convincing personalized speech. Moreover, TASTE’s text-aligned speech editing makes voice manipulation straightforward. Overall, TASTE offers clear utility for beneficial applications, but responsible deployment—paired with consent, provenance, and anti-abuse safeguards—is essential to mitigate misuse risks. On the other hand, this study includes human evaluations in the form of subjective listening tests. Annotators were recruited from Amazon Mechanical Turk and compensated fairly according to the platform’s recommended rates. All participants provided informed consent, and no personal information has been collected. The audio material used in the evaluation does not contain sensitive content. The study adheres to the ethical standards commonly adopted in speech perception research.

# Acknowledgement

This work is partially supported by the National Science and Technology Council (NSTC) in Taiwan under Grant NSTC 113-2634-F-002-008, and Liang-Hsuan Tseng is supported by the NSTC Graduate Research Fellowship (NSTC-GRF). We also extend our gratitude to the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments, which can be found at <https://openreview.net/forum?id=6STb8DauN1>.

# Appendix

## Supplementary Results

<div class="minipage">

<div class="adjustbox">

width=, center

<div id="tab:asr_effect_on_sqa">

| Method         | WER  | UTMOS | DNS-MOS | ViSQOL | Drtn. Con. | Spkr. Sim. |
|:---------------|:----:|:-----:|:-------:|:------:|:----------:|:----------:|
| TASTE (w/ ASR) | 4.4% | 4.29  |  4.10   |  3.05  |    0.91    |    0.80    |
| TASTE (w/ GT)  | 4.6% | 4.24  |  4.08   |  3.06  |    0.91    |    0.81    |

The ablation study on how the ASR affects our SLM on spoken QA.

</div>

</div>

<span id="tab:asr_effect_on_speech_recon" label="tab:asr_effect_on_speech_recon"></span>

</div>

<div class="minipage">

<div class="adjustbox">

width=, center

<div id="tab:asr_effect_on_sqa">

| Methods        | Web-Q | LLaMA-Q |
|:---------------|:-----:|:-------:|
| TASLM (w/ ASR) | 27.1  |  57.6   |
| TASLM (w/ GT)  | 28.0  |  57.7   |

The ablation study on how the ASR affects our SLM on spoken QA.

</div>

</div>

<span id="tab:asr_effect_on_sqa" label="tab:asr_effect_on_sqa"></span>

</div>

<div class="adjustbox">

width=, center

<div id="tab:asr_effect_on_gpt4o_eval">

| Evaluation Models | TWIST 1.3B | TWIST 7B | Spirit LM | Spirit LM Expr. | S3 token | TASLM (token) | TASLM (embed.) |
|:---|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|
| Whisper + GPT-4o | 1.48 | 1.44 | 2.79 | 1.90 | 1.37 | **3.08** | **3.16** |
| nvidia-parakeet + GPT-4o | 1.38 | 1.49 | 2.76 | 2.06 | 1.42 | **3.20** | **3.37** |

The ablation study on using a different ASR model regarding the SLM continuation semantic evaluation. Overall, we do not observe significant *relative* performance difference.

</div>

</div>

<span id="tab:asr_effect_on_gpt4o_eval" label="tab:asr_effect_on_gpt4o_eval"></span>

### Ablation Study on the Effect of ASR

Because our tokenization, SLM, as well as the evaluation using GPT-4o all rely on an ASR system to extract text transcriptions, we conduct several ablation studies to assess the impact of ASR on performance. **1)** In Table <a href="#tab:asr_effect_on_speech_recon" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:asr_effect_on_speech_recon">[tab:asr_effect_on_speech_recon]</a> and Table <a href="#tab:asr_effect_on_sqa" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:asr_effect_on_sqa">6</a>, we study how the ASR affects the performance of our TASTE tokenizer on speech reconstruction and TASLM on spoken question answering. Our results indicate that on both the tokenization and the SLM stages, the performance drop introduced by the ASR errors are almost negligible, primarily attributed to the robustness of recent ASR systems. Note that we do not use any ground-truth transcriptions in the previous experiments in the main text. **2)** We study how substituting the ASR used to produce transcripts before GPT-4o’s semantic-coherence evaluation affects the reported scores. As shown in Table <a href="#tab:asr_effect_on_gpt4o_eval" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:asr_effect_on_gpt4o_eval">7</a>, we use another ASR model named nvidia-parakeet , which employs an RNN-T  backbone. The results indicate that there is no significant relative performance difference between using Whisper and nvidia-parakeet ASR systems. TASLMs achieve much better results in both evaluation setups compared to the other pretrained SLMs.

### Aggregator Cross Attention Visualization

To understand whether the aggregator has learned the text-speech aligned pattern, we visualize its cross attention map across all the layers and heads in Figure <a href="#fig:cross_attn_layer_1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:cross_attn_layer_1">4</a> and Figure <a href="#fig:cross_attn_layer_0" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:cross_attn_layer_0">5</a>.

<figure id="fig:cross_attn_layer_1" data-latex-placement="!b">
<embed src="figure/cross_attn_layer_1.pdf" />
<figcaption> <strong>The cross attention map of the last layer in our aggregator.</strong> As illustrated, a lot of heads clearly demonstrate the text-speech aligned behavior. </figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:cross_attn_layer_0" data-latex-placement="!t">
<embed src="figure/cross_attn_layer_0.pdf" />
<figcaption> <strong>The cross attention map of the first layer in our aggregator.</strong> As illustrated, the behavior is quite different from the last layer in Figure <a href="#fig:cross_attn_layer_1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:cross_attn_layer_1">4</a>. We observe some special heads: Head 8th showns clear alignment; while head 19th lights up at the silence part. </figcaption>
</figure>

### Discussion on the Selection of Shallow Hidden Layer

In Section <a href="#subsubsec:taste_speech_tokenizer" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsubsec:taste_speech_tokenizer">3.1.1</a>, we propose using the shallow hidden representation from Whisper encoder as the key in our specialized cross attention, as it carries rich acoustic information. In practice, we select $`l=6`$. In Table <a href="#tab:taste_modules_ablation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:taste_modules_ablation">4</a>, this allows us to achieve a near-optimal reconstruction accuracy on the target S3 unit. To further justify this selection, we follow the analysis methodology of  and compute the Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA; ) between each Whisper encoder layer and the target S3 unit embeddings. The resulting similarity curve is shown in Figure <a href="#fig:whisper_cca_s3" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:whisper_cca_s3">6</a>. The correlations peak at the 4-th to 8-th layers, indicating that these shallow layers encode representations most aligned with the S3 targets—supporting our design choice of using a shallow hidden state. Importantly, Table <a href="#tab:taste_modules_ablation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:taste_modules_ablation">4</a> also shows that while the choice of the shallow layer affects the attainable upper bound, it does not impose a strict limitation on our method: even using the final encoder layer, whose correlation to S3 is much lower, still yields reconstruction quality better than the text-only baseline.

<figure id="fig:whisper_cca_s3" data-latex-placement="!b">
<embed src="figure/whisper_cca_s3.pdf" />
<figcaption> <strong>Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) between each Whisper encoder layer and the S3 target embeddings.</strong> Layers 4–8 exhibit the highest correlation with the S3 units, indicating that shallow representations contain the most target-relevant acoustic information. </figcaption>
</figure>

<div class="adjustbox">

width=, center

<div id="tab:taste_tokenization_robustness">

<table>
<caption> <strong>The tokenizer robustness ablation study.</strong> We apply four different level of noise, with signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) ranging from 20dB (almost clean) to 5dB (very noisy). Our method substantially achieves good reconstruction quality across all noise levels. </caption>
<thead>
<tr>
<th style="text-align: left;">Method</th>
<th style="text-align: right;">Bitrate</th>
<th colspan="3" style="text-align: center;"><strong>SNR=20dB (clean)</strong></th>
<th colspan="3" style="text-align: center;"><strong>SNR=15dB</strong></th>
<th colspan="3" style="text-align: center;"><strong>SNR=10dB</strong></th>
<th colspan="3" style="text-align: center;"><strong>SNR=5dB (noisy)</strong></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"><span>3-5</span> (lr)<span>6-8</span> (lr)<span>9-11</span> (lr)<span>12-14</span></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">WER <span class="math inline">↓</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Sim. <span class="math inline">↑</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Rank</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">WER <span class="math inline">↓</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Sim. <span class="math inline">↑</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Rank</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">WER <span class="math inline">↓</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Sim. <span class="math inline">↑</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Rank</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">WER <span class="math inline">↓</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Sim. <span class="math inline">↑</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Rank</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Ground Truth</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">256k</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.3%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.5%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.6%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">9.2%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;">500</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">93.7%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.193</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">13</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">97.7%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.201</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">12</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">98.6%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.205</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">12</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">98.3%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.202</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">13</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">DAC<span class="math inline"><sup><em>α</em></sup></span></td>
<td style="text-align: right;">1000</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">36.0%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.292</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">11</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">55.0%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.276</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">11</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">80.2%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.278</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">11</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">94.5%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.283</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">10</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;">12000</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.5%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.937</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.9%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.924</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.7%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.914</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">12.3%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.907</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;">500</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">98.7%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.295</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">12</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">104.6%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.264</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">12</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">107.1%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.264</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">12</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">105.8%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.283</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">12</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">DM-Codec<span class="math inline"><sup><em>β</em></sup></span></td>
<td style="text-align: right;">1000</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">33.9%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.479</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">9</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">53.0%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.447</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">9</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">77.4%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.435</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">9</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">97.1%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.415</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;">4000</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.9%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.737</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6.4%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.689</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">14.4%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.647</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">38.5%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.595</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;">500</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">15.2%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.334</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">9</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">33.9%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.324</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">9</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">64.2%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.301</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">9</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">91.7%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.277</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">10</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">SpeechTokenizer<span class="math inline"><sup><em>γ</em></sup></span></td>
<td style="text-align: right;">2000</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">7.3%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.773</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">8</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">16.3%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.734</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">8</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">39.4%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.682</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">8</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">73.8%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.600</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;">4000</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.4%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.864</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">8.1%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.822</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">21.0%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.765</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">49.2%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.684</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">BigCodec<span class="math inline"><sup><em>δ</em></sup></span></td>
<td style="text-align: right;">1040</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">10.1%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.829</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">7</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">17.8%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.785</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">7</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">33.5%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.718</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">7</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">63.0%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.625</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Mimi<span class="math inline"><sup><em>ϵ</em></sup></span></td>
<td style="text-align: right;">1000</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5.1%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.804</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">7.8%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.772</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">14.7%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.726</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">33.6%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.673</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">S3 token<span class="math inline"><sup><em>ζ</em></sup></span></td>
<td style="text-align: right;">600</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.9%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.860</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5.2%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.841</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">8.1%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.815</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">16.7%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.779</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">TASTE (ours)</td>
<td style="text-align: right;"><strong><span class="math inline">∼</span>150</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.8%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.842</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5.3%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.830</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6.9%</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.815</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>11.1%</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.792</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>1</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="14" style="text-align: left;"><span class="math inline"><sup><em>α</em></sup></span> <span class="citation" data-cites="dac"></span>; <span class="math inline"><sup><em>β</em></sup></span> <span class="citation" data-cites="dmcodec"></span>; <span class="math inline"><sup><em>γ</em></sup></span> <span class="citation" data-cites="speechtokenizer"></span>; <span class="math inline"><sup><em>δ</em></sup></span> <span class="citation" data-cites="bigcodec"></span>; <span class="math inline"><sup><em>ϵ</em></sup></span> <span class="citation" data-cites="moshi"></span>; <span class="math inline"><sup><em>ζ</em></sup></span> <span class="citation" data-cites="cosyvoice"></span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

</div>

<span id="tab:taste_tokenization_robustness" label="tab:taste_tokenization_robustness"></span>

### Robustness Ablation on TASTE Tokenizer

To evaluate our tokenizer robustness, we have conducted controlled noise level experiments on speech reconstruction. Specifically, we add 4 different levels of white noise to the original waveform and then evaluate the reconstruction performance. The noise levels are defined by signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) ranging from 20dB (almost clean) to 5dB (very noisy). We report two metrics: ASR-WER as an indicator of reconstruction quality, and speaker similarity (Sim.) as a measure of reconstruction similarity. For ease of comparison, we also provide the overall rank of each tokenizer considering both metrics. The results in Table <a href="#tab:taste_tokenization_robustness" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:taste_tokenization_robustness">8</a> show that our tokenizer remains stable across different noise levels, demonstrating strong robustness. Notably, TASTE achieves the best ASR-WER under the noisiest condition. This suggests that the underlying ASR system is not a limiting factor for the general applicability of TASTE; rather, it serves as an effective and reliable source of semantic information for the reconstruction.

### Details on SALMON and StoryCloze

Our detailed results on SALMON and StoryCloze are reported in Table <a href="#tab:taslm_results" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:taslm_results">9</a>. The introductions of the two benchmarks—SALMON and StoryCloze—are described below.

<div class="adjustbox">

width=, center

<div id="tab:taslm_results">

<table>
<caption>The evaluation results on SALMON and StoryCloze of different SLMs, and BG means background. We report likelihood-based accuracy on SALMON (acoustic aspect) and StoryCloze (semantic aspect). The baseline (S3 token) is conducted by joint speech-text modeling with the S3 token as speech tokenization. </caption>
<thead>
<tr>
<th style="text-align: left;"><strong><span class="smallcaps">Method</span></strong></th>
<th style="text-align: center;">LoRA</th>
<th colspan="6" style="text-align: center;"><strong><span class="smallcaps">SALMon (Acoustic Consistency)</span></strong></th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><strong><span class="smallcaps">StoryCloze</span></strong></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"><span>3-8</span> (lr)<span>9-9</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Sentiment</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Speaker</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Gender</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Room</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">(domain)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">(rand.)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="9" style="text-align: left;"><em>Previous Work</em></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">TWIST 1.3B (<span class="citation" data-cites="twist"></span>)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">61.5<span class="math inline">±</span>3.4</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">69.0<span class="math inline">±</span>3.3</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">69.5<span class="math inline">±</span>3.3</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">59.0<span class="math inline">±</span>3.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">55.5<span class="math inline">±</span>3.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">60.5<span class="math inline">±</span>3.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">52.4<span class="math inline">±</span>0.8 / 70.6<span class="math inline">±</span>0.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">TWIST 7B (<span class="citation" data-cites="twist"></span>)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">61.5<span class="math inline">±</span>3.4</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">71.0<span class="math inline">±</span>3.2</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">70.0<span class="math inline">±</span>3.2</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">62.0<span class="math inline">±</span>3.4</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">55.5<span class="math inline">±</span>3.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">60.5<span class="math inline">±</span>3.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">55.3<span class="math inline">±</span>0.8 / 74.1<span class="math inline">±</span>0.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Spirit LM (<span class="citation" data-cites="spiritlm"></span>)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">54.5<span class="math inline">±</span>3.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">69.5<span class="math inline">±</span>3.3</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">67.0<span class="math inline">±</span>3.3</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">54.5<span class="math inline">±</span>3.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">53.5<span class="math inline">±</span>3.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">55.5<span class="math inline">±</span>3.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">61.0<span class="math inline">±</span>0.8 / 82.9<span class="math inline">±</span>0.6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Spirit LM Expr. (<span class="citation" data-cites="spiritlm"></span>)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">73.5<span class="math inline">±</span>3.1</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">81.0<span class="math inline">±</span>2.8</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">85.0<span class="math inline">±</span>2.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">54.5<span class="math inline">±</span>3.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">56.0<span class="math inline">±</span>3.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">64.0<span class="math inline">±</span>3.4</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">56.9<span class="math inline">±</span>0.8 / 75.4<span class="math inline">±</span>0.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Baseline (S3 token)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">49.5<span class="math inline">±</span>3.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">48.8<span class="math inline">±</span>3.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">48.8<span class="math inline">±</span>3.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">49.5<span class="math inline">±</span>3.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">55.3<span class="math inline">±</span>3.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">49.5<span class="math inline">±</span>3.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">54.4<span class="math inline">±</span>0.8 / 63.0<span class="math inline">±</span>0.8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">TASLM 1B (token)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">59.0<span class="math inline">±</span>3.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">68.0<span class="math inline">±</span>3.3</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">70.5<span class="math inline">±</span>3.2</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">61.0<span class="math inline">±</span>3.4</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">52.0<span class="math inline">±</span>3.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">54.0<span class="math inline">±</span>3.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">64.2<span class="math inline">±</span>0.8 / 88.9<span class="math inline">±</span>0.5</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">TASLM 1B (embedding)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">57.5<span class="math inline">±</span>3.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">67.0<span class="math inline">±</span>3.3</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">75.5<span class="math inline">±</span>3.0</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">50.0<span class="math inline">±</span>3.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">47.0<span class="math inline">±</span>3.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">49.0<span class="math inline">±</span>3.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">64.0<span class="math inline">±</span>0.8 / 89.5<span class="math inline">±</span>0.5</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

</div>

<span id="tab:taslm_results" label="tab:taslm_results"></span>

#### SALMON for Acoustic Evaluation

SALMON offers a comprehensive set of metrics designed to evaluate SLMs in multiple dimensions. In summary, each test sample consists of a *positive* sample and a *negative* sample. The *negative* sample differs from the *positive* sample by having some segments altered. These alterations include changes in speaker, gender, environment (e.g., room acoustics), or sentiment in the middle of the utterance. The SLM serves as an anomoly detector that aims to distinguish between the pairs of *positive* and *negative* samples. The distinction is based on the likelihood score given by each SLM, which is then evaluated with the overall precision between the ground truth and the prediction.

#### StoryCloze for Semantic Evaluation

To evaluate the SLMs’ ability to comprehend semantic coherence and logical reasoning, we employ the spoken version of StoryCloze test (sSC) and the Topic StoryCloze test (tSC) assembled by . Assessment of narrative understanding involves presenting a four-sentence story setup, followed by two possible endings. These tasks require the model to select the most appropriate conclusion, thereby testing its grasp of causal and temporal relationships within a narrative. Similarly to SALMON, we measure the accuracy of the distinctions based on the likelihood scores.

#### Discussion on SALMON and StoryCloze

On SALMON, we observe that our TASLM falls short for background-related attributes (Room, Background) where the samples are added with environmental sounds (echoes, instruments, background noises from FSD50K). Since TASTE tokenization focuses on natural speech and has not being trained on audio with environmental sound and noise, it may not be able to convey such information. However, on the speech related attributes, such as gender and speaker, our TASLM performs much better and is comparable to other SLMs. On StoryCloze, our TASLM successfully retains its semantic capability with effective joint modeling on TASTE, leading to the best results among all pretrained SLMs.

### Report of Standard Deviations

We report the standard deviations of our tables in the main text to allow further investigation.

<div class="adjustbox">

width=0.8, center

<table>
<caption> <strong>Results with standard deviations of Table <a href="#tab:taste_tokenization_main" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:taste_tokenization_main">1</a></strong> </caption>
<thead>
<tr>
<th style="text-align: left;">Method</th>
<th style="text-align: right;">Bitrate</th>
<th colspan="3" style="text-align: center;"><strong><span class="smallcaps">Quality</span></strong></th>
<th colspan="4" style="text-align: center;"><strong><span class="smallcaps">Similarity</span></strong></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"><span>3-5</span> (lr)<span>6-9</span></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">WER <span class="math inline">↓</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">UTMOS</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">DNSMOS</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">ViSQOL</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Drtn. Con.</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Spkr. Sim.</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">MUSHRA</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Ground Truth</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">256k</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.1%<span class="math inline">±</span>0.07</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.09<span class="math inline">±</span>0.32</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.84<span class="math inline">±</span>0.26</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">76.6<span class="math inline">±</span>15.9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2" style="text-align: left;">Encodec <span class="citation" data-cites="encodec"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: right;">1500</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5.1%<span class="math inline">±</span>0.11</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.58<span class="math inline">±</span>0.34</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.26<span class="math inline">±</span>0.24</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.46<span class="math inline">±</span>0.28</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.94<span class="math inline">±</span>0.003</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.63<span class="math inline">±</span>0.10</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">3000</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.6%<span class="math inline">±</span>0.08</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.35<span class="math inline">±</span>0.53</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.48<span class="math inline">±</span>0.25</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.81<span class="math inline">±</span>0.27</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.96<span class="math inline">±</span>0.002</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.78<span class="math inline">±</span>0.07</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">25.6<span class="math inline">±</span>18.6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;">500</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5.2%<span class="math inline">±</span>0.11</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.27<span class="math inline">±</span>0.05</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.99<span class="math inline">±</span>0.17</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.80<span class="math inline">±</span>0.24</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.94<span class="math inline">±</span>0.003</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.35<span class="math inline">±</span>0.09</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">SpeechTokenizer <span class="citation" data-cites="speechtokenizer"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: right;">2000</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.0%<span class="math inline">±</span>0.08</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.56<span class="math inline">±</span>0.43</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.60<span class="math inline">±</span>0.28</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.65<span class="math inline">±</span>0.22</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.97<span class="math inline">±</span>0.002</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.80<span class="math inline">±</span>0.06</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">53.9<span class="math inline">±</span>22.9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: right;">4000</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.5%<span class="math inline">±</span>0.08</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.90<span class="math inline">±</span>0.36</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.76<span class="math inline">±</span>0.28</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.03<span class="math inline">±</span>0.17</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.98<span class="math inline">±</span>0.002</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.92<span class="math inline">±</span>0.04</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Mimi <span class="citation" data-cites="moshi"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: right;">1000</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.1%<span class="math inline">±</span>0.09</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.60<span class="math inline">±</span>0.37</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.60<span class="math inline">±</span>0.30</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.62<span class="math inline">±</span>0.26</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.96<span class="math inline">±</span>0.002</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.82<span class="math inline">±</span>0.06</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">67.6<span class="math inline">±</span>19.8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">S3 token (topline) <span class="citation" data-cites="cosyvoice"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: right;">600</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.0%<span class="math inline">±</span>0.09</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.18<span class="math inline">±</span>0.27</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.90<span class="math inline">±</span>0.24</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.30<span class="math inline">±</span>0.26</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.96<span class="math inline">±</span>0.002</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.82<span class="math inline">±</span>0.09</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">70.2<span class="math inline">±</span>17.0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Text-only (baseline)</td>
<td style="text-align: right;"><span class="math inline">∼</span>50</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5.9%<span class="math inline">±</span>0.11</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.31<span class="math inline">±</span>0.16</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.11<span class="math inline">±</span>0.22</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.44<span class="math inline">±</span>0.23</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.57<span class="math inline">±</span>0.006</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.78<span class="math inline">±</span>0.09</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">42.6<span class="math inline">±</span>27.1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">TASTE (ours)</td>
<td style="text-align: right;"><span class="math inline">∼</span>150</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.4%<span class="math inline">±</span>0.11</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.29<span class="math inline">±</span>0.18</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.10<span class="math inline">±</span>0.22</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.05<span class="math inline">±</span>0.26</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.91<span class="math inline">±</span>0.003</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.80<span class="math inline">±</span>0.08</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">68.3<span class="math inline">±</span>17.1</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<div class="adjustbox">

width=0.8, center

<table>
<caption> <strong>Results with standard deviations of Table <a href="#tab:taslm_continuation_results" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:taslm_continuation_results">2</a>.</strong> </caption>
<thead>
<tr>
<th style="text-align: left;">Method</th>
<th style="text-align: center;">Finetuned / base</th>
<th colspan="3" style="text-align: center;"><strong><span class="smallcaps">Continuation</span></strong></th>
<th colspan="3" style="text-align: center;"><strong><span class="smallcaps">Likelihood</span></strong></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"><span>3-5</span> (lr)<span>6-8</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">parameters</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">GPT-4o</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">UTMOS</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Human</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">SALMON</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">StoryCloze</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Overall</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align: left;"><em>Cascade</em></td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Cascade (LLaMA3.2-1B<span class="math inline"><sup><em>α</em></sup></span>)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.15<span class="math inline">±</span>1.27</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.25<span class="math inline">±</span>0.22</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.00<span class="math inline">±</span>1.28</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Cascade (LLaMA2-7B<span class="math inline"><sup><em>β</em></sup></span>)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.43<span class="math inline">±</span>1.27</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.25<span class="math inline">±</span>0.25</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.98<span class="math inline">±</span>1.29</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align: left;"><em>Spoken LMs</em></td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">TWIST 1.3B <span class="citation" data-cites="twist"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.3B / 1.3B<span class="math inline"><sup><em>θ</em></sup></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.48<span class="math inline">±</span>0.70</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.25<span class="math inline">±</span>0.48</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.95<span class="math inline">±</span>1.01</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">62.5<span class="math inline">±</span>1.4</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">61.5<span class="math inline">±</span>0.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">62.0<span class="math inline">±</span>0.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">TWIST 7B <span class="citation" data-cites="twist"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">   7B /    7B<span class="math inline"><sup><em>γ</em></sup></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.44<span class="math inline">±</span>0.70</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.27<span class="math inline">±</span>0.52</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.04<span class="math inline">±</span>0.91</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">63.4<span class="math inline">±</span>1.4</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">64.7<span class="math inline">±</span>0.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">64.1<span class="math inline">±</span>0.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Spirit LM <span class="citation" data-cites="spiritlm"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">   7B /    7B<span class="math inline"><sup><em>β</em></sup></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.79<span class="math inline">±</span>1.06</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.41<span class="math inline">±</span>0.19</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.38<span class="math inline">±</span>0.81</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">59.1<span class="math inline">±</span>1.4</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">72.0<span class="math inline">±</span>0.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">65.6<span class="math inline">±</span>0.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Spirit LM Expr. <span class="citation" data-cites="spiritlm"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">   7B /    7B<span class="math inline"><sup><em>β</em></sup></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.90<span class="math inline">±</span>1.03</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.40<span class="math inline">±</span>0.30</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.41<span class="math inline">±</span>0.96</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">69.0<span class="math inline">±</span>1.3</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">66.2<span class="math inline">±</span>0.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">67.6<span class="math inline">±</span>0.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Baseline (S3 token)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">45M / 1.3B<span class="math inline"><sup><em>α</em></sup></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.37<span class="math inline">±</span>0.87</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.04<span class="math inline">±</span>0.27</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.84<span class="math inline">±</span>1.11</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">50.2<span class="math inline">±</span>1.4</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">58.7<span class="math inline">±</span>0.6</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">54.5<span class="math inline">±</span>0.8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">TASLM 1B (token)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">45M / 1.3B<span class="math inline"><sup><em>α</em></sup></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.08<span class="math inline">±</span>1.37</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.07<span class="math inline">±</span>0.28</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.93<span class="math inline">±</span>1.30</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">60.8<span class="math inline">±</span>1.4</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">76.5<span class="math inline">±</span>0.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">68.7<span class="math inline">±</span>0.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">TASLM 1B (embed.)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">45M / 1.3B<span class="math inline"><sup><em>α</em></sup></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.16<span class="math inline">±</span>1.33</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.22<span class="math inline">±</span>0.21</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.16<span class="math inline">±</span>1.20</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">57.7<span class="math inline">±</span>1.4</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">76.7<span class="math inline">±</span>0.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">67.2<span class="math inline">±</span>0.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="7" style="text-align: left;">Base models: <span class="math inline"><sup><em>α</em></sup></span>LLaMA3.2-1B, <span class="math inline"><sup><em>β</em></sup></span>LLaMA2-7B, <span class="math inline"><sup><em>γ</em></sup></span>LLaMA-7B, <span class="math inline"><sup><em>θ</em></sup></span>OPT-1.3B</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<div class="adjustbox">

width=0.4, center

<table>
<caption><strong>Results with standard deviations of Table <a href="#tab:taslm_qa_results" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:taslm_qa_results">[tab:taslm_qa_results]</a>.</strong></caption>
<thead>
<tr>
<th style="text-align: left;">Method</th>
<th style="text-align: center;">Mode</th>
<th style="text-align: center;">Web Q.</th>
<th style="text-align: center;">LLaMA-Q.</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Mini-Omni 0.5B(T<span class="math inline">$\xrightarrow{}$</span>T)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">T</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">21.3<span class="math inline">±</span>0.9</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">39.0<span class="math inline">±</span>2.8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Mini-Omni 0.5B <span class="citation" data-cites="mini-omni"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">T+A</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.5<span class="math inline">±</span>0.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">11.6<span class="math inline">±</span>1.8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Helium 7B (text)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">T</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">32.3<span class="math inline">±</span>1.0</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">75.0<span class="math inline">±</span>2.5</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Moshi 7B <span class="citation" data-cites="moshi"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">T+A</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">26.6<span class="math inline">±</span>1.0</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">62.3<span class="math inline">±</span>2.8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">LLaMA3.1-8B-Instruct</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">T</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">60.4<span class="math inline">±</span>1.1</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">71.7<span class="math inline">±</span>2.6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Llama-Omni-8B <span class="citation" data-cites="llama-omni"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">T+A</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">35.5<span class="math inline">±</span>1.1</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">67.3<span class="math inline">±</span>2.7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">LLaMA3.2-1B<span class="math inline"><sup>†</sup></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">T</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">24.0<span class="math inline">±</span>0.9</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">51.0<span class="math inline">±</span>2.9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">TASLM 1B (embed.)<span class="math inline"><sup>†</sup></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">T+A</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">27.1<span class="math inline">±</span>1.0</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">57.6<span class="math inline">±</span>2.9</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align: left;"><span class="math inline"><sup>†</sup></span>We apply few-shot learning to facilitate question answering.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

## Training Details

### Hyperparameters and Configurations

We separate the training process into the two phases: *deriving TASTE tokenization* and *conducting spoken language modeling with TASTE*. In the tokenization phase, only the $`\mathrm{Aggregator}`$, $`\mathrm{Quantizer}`$, and the $`\mathrm{UnitDecoder}`$ is trainable. We use the $`\mathrm{Adam}`$  optimizer and the learning rate is set to 0.0016. The batch size is set to 160 seconds on each of the 8 NVIDIA A6000 GPUs we used. Note that in the first 2 epochs the quantization is not applied. From the beginning of the third epoch, quantization is applied and the $`\mathrm{Quantizer}`$ starts to be updated. We train the TASTE tokenizer for 5 epochs, which takes about 2 days for learning, with the learning rate gradually decayed.

As for the spoken language modeling training phase, we use the $`\mathrm{AdamW}`$  optimizer, the $`\mathrm{Consine}`$ scheduler with the learning rate set to 1e-5. We use 8 Nvidia A6000 GPUs for training. The total batch size summation over the GPUs is set to 768 samples with the gradient accumulation steps set to 2. To reduce the memory overhead and the computational cost, we employ `bfloat16` mixed precision during training. Tools such as DeepSpeed  and Liger Kernel  are also applied to speed up the fine-tuning process of the SLM.

## Evaluation Details

### Human Evaluation

We conduct human listening tests through Amazon Mechanical Turk. In each experiment, we randomly select the same 20 samples from each method; and for each sample we collect more than 10 evaluation scores across different human evaluators.

#### MUSHRA

In Table <a href="#tab:taste_tokenization_main" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:taste_tokenization_main">1</a>, we have shown our result of the MUSRHA human listening test . Following , we conduct the evaluation with a hidden reference but without a lowerpass-filtered anchor. We instruct evaluators to rate the perceptual quality of the given samples with respect to the ground truth on a scale of 1 to 100.

#### Speech Continuation MOS

In Table <a href="#tab:taslm_continuation_results" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:taslm_continuation_results">2</a>, we mention that we have conducted the human listening test to evaluate the overall performance of the speech continuations. Here, we present the instruction for human speech continuation MOS evaluation as follows:

<div class="tcolorbox">

In this test, each sample will contain a short audio clip called "prompt" (3 seconds) and a longer audio clip called "prompt+continuation" ($`\sim`$<!-- -->15 seconds).\
You will be asked to rate the speech quality of the "prompt+continuation" audio clip, specifically focus on the "continuation" part.\
The rating should be based on how likely you think that the long audio is a proper continuation of the "prompt" audio.\
Specifically, the rating should be based on the following scale:\
1: Bad - The "continuation" is not distinguishable or not natural.\
2: Poor - The "continuation" is 25% distinguishable.\
3: Fair - The "continuation" is 50% distinguishable and natural.\
4: Good - The "continuation" is 75% distinguishable and natural.\
5: Excellent - The "continuation" is distinguishable, meaningful, and natural.\
**Distinguishable** means that the words in the "continuation" is distinguishable.\
**Natural** means that the "continuation" sounds like a real human voice and a natural continuation of the prompt without considering the content of the speech.\
**Meaningful** means that you can not only distinguish the words but also understand the meaning of the whole "prompt+continuation".

</div>

### GPT-4o for MOS Evaluation

As introduced in Section <a href="#subsec:spoken_language_modeling_result" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsec:spoken_language_modeling_result">5.1.2</a>, we use GPT-4o to assign MOS scores to the speech continuation results . Here, we describe the detailed procedure. First, `whisper-large-v3` is applied to transcribe the generated speech. Then, given the transcription, the text content from the prompt audio, and the instruction template, GPT-4o can produce a score between 1 and 5. The instruction template is provided below:

<div class="tcolorbox">

The task is evaluating the relevance and likelihood of the predicted text continuation, given the text prompt. You should also consider whether the meaning of the text continuation is making sense. The text prompt is:\
"{prompt}"\
, and the text continuation is :\
"{content}"\
\
You must give an overall rating from 1 to 5. The rating guideline is as below:\
1: The text continuation is very unlikely and irrelevant to the text prompt.\
2: The text continuation is unlikely and marginally relevant to the text prompt.\
3: The text continuation is moderately likely and relevant to the text prompt.\
4: The text continuation is likely and relevant to the text prompt.\
5: The text continuation is very likely and highly relevant.\
You should take the following steps to provide the score:\
First: briefly analyze the sample with the above definition.\
Second: MUST follow the output format as: I would rate the score as \_\

</div>

## Tackling the Vocabulary Mismatch

The vocabulary mismatch problem lies in the fact that the vocabulary sets are different between the ASR and the LLM, and TASTE is aligned with the text transcription tokens from ASR. Consider that given a text transcription $`\bm{v}`$ and the vocabulary sets of ASR and LLM denoted as $`\mathbb{V}^{\text{asr}}`$ and $`\mathbb{V}^{\text{llm}}`$, the ASR tokenized sequence $`\bm{v}^{\text{asr}}=[v^{\text{asr}}_1, v^{\text{asr}}_2, \ldots, v^{\text{asr}}_N], v^{\text{asr}}_i \in \mathbb{V}^{\text{asr}}`$ and the LLM tokenized sequence $`\bm{v}^{\text{llm}}=[v^{\text{llm}}_1, v^{\text{llm}}_2, \ldots, v^{\text{llm}}_{M}], v^{\text{llm}}_i \in \mathbb{V}^{\text{llm}}`$ can be different in terms of token ids and sequence lengths. Since the TASTE token and embedding are aligned with $`\bm{v}^{\text{asr}}`$, we need to derive a method to align them with $`\bm{v}^{\text{llm}}`$ for text-aligned speech-text modeling. Notice that $`\bm{v}^{\text{asr}}`$ and $`\bm{v}^{\text{llm}}`$ both represent $`\bm{v}`$, we propose to mitigate the issue through word-level *grouping*, *averaging*, and *aligning*, detailed in Algorithm <a href="#alg:aligning_taste_with_llm_tokens" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="alg:aligning_taste_with_llm_tokens">[alg:aligning_taste_with_llm_tokens]</a>. By crafting TASTE speech tokenization into the word level, we are able to align it with the text tokens of the LLM, denoted as $`\tilde{\bm{q}},  \tilde{\bm{z}}`$. In practice, we also adopt the word-level averaging technique during the TASTE tokenization training phase, ensuring that the word-level TASTE tokenization facilitates high-quality reconstruction.

<div class="algorithm">

<div class="algorithmic">

**Initialization:** Text transcription $`\bm{v} = [\text{word}_1, \text{word}_2, \ldots, \text{word}_W]`$ ASR tokens of the transcription $`\bm{v}^{\text{asr}} = [v^{\text{asr}}_1, v^{\text{asr}}_2, \ldots, v^{\text{asr}}_N]`$ TASTE embedding $`\hat{\bm{z}} = [\hat{z}_1, \hat{z}_2, \ldots, \hat{z}_N]`$ LLM tokens of the transcription $`\bm{v}^{\text{llm}} = [v^{\text{llm}}_1, v^{\text{llm}}_2, \ldots, v^{\text{llm}}_{M}]`$

Since $`\bm{v}^{\text{asr}}`$ is a token sequence represents $`\bm{v}`$, we can easily group it by words: $`\bm{v}^{\text{asr}}_{\text{grouped}} \gets [\underbrace{({v}^{\text{asr}}_1, {v}^{\text{asr}}_2, {v}^{\text{asr}}_3)_1}_{\text{word}_1}, \underbrace{({v}^{\text{asr}}_4)_2}_{\text{word}_2}, \ldots, \underbrace{({v}^{\text{asr}}_{N-1}, \bm{v}^{\text{asr}}_N)_W}_{\text{word}_W}]`$ With the word-level grouping from $`\bm{v}^{\text{asr}}_{\text{grouped}}`$, we can group TASTE embedding $`\hat{\bm{z}}`$ as well: $`\hat{\bm{z}}_{\text{grouped}} \gets [(\hat{z}_1, \hat{z}_2, \hat{z}_3)_1, (\hat{z}_4)_2, \ldots, (\hat{z}_{N-1}, \hat{z}_N)_W]`$ Finally, we can group $`\bm{v}^{\text{llm}}`$ following the similar procedure of grouping $`\bm{v}^{\text{asr}}`$: $`\bm{v}^{\text{llm}}_{\text{grouped}} \gets [\underbrace{({v}^{\text{llm}}_1, {v}^{\text{llm}}_2)_1}_{\text{word}_1}, 
    \underbrace{({v}^{\text{llm}}_3, {v}^{\text{llm}}_4)_2}_{\text{word}_2}, \ldots, 
    \underbrace{({v}^{\text{llm}}_{M-2}, {v}^{\text{llm}}_{M-1}, {v}^{\text{llm}}_{M})_W}_{\text{word}_W}]`$ Due to the *vocabulary mismatch*, the grouping of $`\bm{v}^{\text{llm}}_{\text{grouped}}`$ is different from $`\bm{v}^{\text{asr}}_{\text{grouped}},`$ $`\hat{\bm{z}}_{\text{grouped}}`$. $`\bar{\bm{z}} \gets []`$ word group $`(\hat{z}_j, \ldots, \hat{z}_k) \gets \hat{\bm{z}}_{\text{grouped}}[i]`$ $`{\bar{z}}_{[j:k]} \gets \mathrm{Average}((\hat{z}_j, \ldots, \hat{z}_k))`$ **append** $`{\bar{z}}_{[j:k]}`$ **to** $`\bar{\bm{z}}`$ Resulting in word-level TASTE embedding $`\bar{\bm{z}} \in \mathbb{R}^{W \times d_z}`$, where $`W`$ is the word length of $`v`$. $`\tilde{\bm{z}} \gets []`$ word group $`({v}^{\text{llm}}_j, \ldots, {v}^{\text{llm}}_k) \gets \bm{v}^{\text{llm}}_{\text{grouped}}[i]`$ $`M \gets \mathrm{Length}(({v}^{\text{llm}}_j, \ldots, {v}^{\text{llm}}_k))`$ **append** $`\bar{\bm{z}}[i]`$ **to** $`\tilde{\bm{z}}`$ The LLM-aligned word-level TASTE embedding $`\tilde{\bm{z}}`$ and its codes form $`\tilde{\bm{q}}`$

</div>

</div>

## The Weighted Sum Mechanism for Modality Fusion

The speech decoder takes the text-aligned speech embedding $`\hat{\bm{z}}`$ and the text embedding $`\bm{v}`$ as input conditions. As depicted in Figure <a href="#fig:taste_method_3-1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:taste_method_3-1">2</a>, in practice we perform a *weighted sum* mechanism to obtain the final fused embedding $`\bm{z}_{\text{joint}}`$. The weights to fuse the two modalities are represented by two learnable parameters, denoted as $`w_\text{sp}`$ and $`w_\text{txt}`$. The whole process of modality fusion can be denoted as follows:
``` math
\hat{\bm{z}}', \bm{v}' = \mathrm{normalize}(\hat{\bm{z}}) \text{,} \mathrm{normalize}(\bm{v}) \text{,} [p_\text{sp}, p_\text{txt}] = \mathrm{softmax}([w_\text{sp}, w_\text{txt}]), z_{\text{joint}} = p_\text{sp} \cdot \hat{\bm{z}}' + p_\text{txt} \cdot \bm{v}'\text{.}
```

## Discussion on the Usage of LLM

We discuss our usage of LLM following the conference’s policy. We use an AI assistant (ChatGPT specifically) to polish English prose, including grammar correction, wording refinements, consistent terminology and hyphenation, and minor restructuring for clarity and flow. The assistant suggests alternative phrasings, section bridges, and standard disclosure/impact wording based on author-provided content. It does not generate novel ideas, claims, analyses, figures, code, or results, and it does not access proprietary data. All technical content and conclusions are our own, and we review and edit all AI-assisted text and take full responsibility for the final manuscript.

[^1]: [`https://huggingface.co/facebook/hubert-large-ls960-ft`](https://huggingface.co/facebook/hubert-large-ls960-ft)

## References

1. On the landscape of spoken language models: A comprehensive survey [arXiv:2504.08528](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.08528)
2. Neural machine translation of rare words with subword units
3. Subword regularization: Improving neural network translation models with multiple subword candidates
4. Sentencepiece: A simple and language independent subword tokenizer and detokenizer for neural text processing
5. On generative spoken language modeling from raw audio
6. Generative Spoken Dialogue Language Modeling
7. High fidelity neural audio compression
8. Soundstream: An end-to-end neural audio codec
9. High-fidelity audio compression with improved rvqgan [arXiv:2306.06546](https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.06546)
10. Snac: Multi-scale neural audio codec
11. Neural codec language models are zero-shot text to speech synthesizers [arXiv:2301.02111](../2023/2301.02111.md)
12. Vall-e 2: Neural codec language models are human parity zero-shot text to speech synthesizers [arXiv:2406.05370](../2024/2406.05370.md)
13. Rall-e: Robust codec language modeling with chain-of-thought prompting for text-to-speech synthesis [arXiv:2404.03204](../2024/2404.03204.md)
14. Soundstorm: Efficient parallel audio generation [arXiv:2305.09636](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.09636)
15. Audiobox: Unified audio generation with natural language prompts [arXiv:2312.15821](../2023/2312.15821.md)
16. Speechtokenizer: Unified speech tokenizer for speech large language models
17. Textually pretrained speech language models
18. Spirit-lm: Interleaved spoken and written language model
19. Moshi: a speech-text foundation model for real-time dialogue [arXiv:2410.00037](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.00037)
20. Mini-omni: Language models can hear, talk while thinking in streaming [arXiv:2408.16725](../2024/2408.16725.md)
21. Llama-omni: Seamless speech interaction with large language models
22. Mini-omni2: Towards open-source gpt-4o with vision, speech and duplex capabilities [arXiv:2410.11190](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.11190)
23. Cosyvoice: A scalable multilingual zero-shot text-to-speech synthesizer based on supervised semantic tokens [arXiv:2407.05407](../2024/2407.05407.md)
24. Cosyvoice 2: Scalable streaming speech synthesis with large language models
25. Naturalspeech 3: Zero-shot speech synthesis with factorized codec and diffusion models
26. UniWav: Towards Unified Pre-training for Speech Representation Learning and Generation
27. wav2vec 2.0: A Framework for Self-Supervised Learning of Speech Representations
28. Hubert: Self-supervised speech representation learning by masked prediction of hidden units
29. Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision
30. Distil-whisper: Robust knowledge distillation via large-scale pseudo labelling [arXiv:2311.00430](https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.00430)
31. Attention is all you need
32. Salmon: A suite for acoustic language model evaluation [arXiv:2409.07437](https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.07437)
33. Text-free prosody-aware generative spoken language modeling
34. Align-SLM: Textless Spoken Language Models with Reinforcement Learning from AI Feedback [arXiv:2411.01834](../2024/2411.01834.md)
35. Glm-4-voice: Towards intelligent and human-like end-to-end spoken chatbot [arXiv:2412.02612](https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.02612)
36. Baichuan-omni-1.5 technical report [arXiv:2501.15368](https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.15368)
37. Viola: Unified codec language models for speech recognition, synthesis, and translation [arXiv:2305.16107](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.16107)
38. VoxtLM: Unified Decoder-Only Models for Consolidating Speech Recognition, Synthesis and Speech, Text Continuation Tasks
39. Qwen-audio: Advancing universal audio understanding via unified large-scale audio-language models [arXiv:2311.07919](https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.07919)
40. Qwen2-audio technical report [arXiv:2407.10759](https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.10759)
41. Whispering llama: A cross-modal generative error correction framework for speech recognition
42. Developing instruction-following speech language model without speech instruction-tuning data
43. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models
44. Towards Efficient Visual-Language Alignment of the Q-Former for Visual Reasoning Tasks
45. Clam-tts: Improving neural codec language model for zero-shot text-to-speech
46. Autoregressive speech synthesis without vector quantization
47. Multimodal latent language modeling with next-token diffusion [arXiv:2412.08635](../2024/2412.08635.md)
48. Unified autoregressive visual generation and understanding with continuous tokens [arXiv:2503.13436](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.13436)
49. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. [arXiv:2106.09685](https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.09685)
50. Deepspeed: System optimizations enable training deep learning models with over 100 billion parameters
51. Liger kernel: Efficient triton kernels for llm training [arXiv:2410.10989](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.10989)
52. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models [arXiv:2302.13971](https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.13971)
53. Emilia: An extensive, multilingual, and diverse speech dataset for large-scale speech generation
54. Libritts: A corpus derived from librispeech for text-to-speech
55. Librispeech: An ASR corpus based on public domain audio books
56. wav2vec2-lg-xlsr-en-speech-emotion-recognition (Revision 17cf17c) [doi:10.57967/hf/2045](https://doi.org/10.57967/hf/2045)
57. Utmos: Utokyo-sarulab system for voicemos challenge 2022
58. DNSMOS: A non-intrusive perceptual objective speech quality metric to evaluate noise suppressors
59. Montreal Forced Aligner: Trainable Text-Speech Alignment Using Kaldi
60. ViSQOL v3: An open source production ready objective speech and audio metric
61. Method for the subjective assessment of intermediate quality level of audio systems
62. Superb: Speech processing universal performance benchmark
63. The zero resource speech benchmark 2021: Metrics and baselines for unsupervised spoken language modeling
64. SUPERB-SG: Enhanced speech processing universal performance benchmark for semantic and generative capabilities
65. Self-supervised speech representations are more phonetic than semantic
66. Estimating the completeness of discrete speech units
67. Matcha-TTS: A fast TTS architecture with conditional flow matching
68. Flow matching for generative modeling
69. Conditional variational autoencoder with adversarial learning for end-to-end text-to-speech
70. OverFlow: Putting flows on top of neural transducers for better TTS
71. Spoken question answering and speech continuation using spectrogram-powered LLM
72. Semantic parsing on freebase from question-answer pairs
73. A corpus and evaluation framework for deeper understanding of commonsense stories
74. Fine-grained style control in transformer-based text-to-speech synthesis
75. Neural target speech extraction: An overview
76. Language models are few-shot learners
77. Can Large Language Models Be an Alternative to Human Evaluations?
78. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization
79. Decoupled Weight Decay Regularization
80. Sequence transduction with recurrent neural networks [arXiv:1211.3711](https://arxiv.org/abs/1211.3711)
81. Efficient sequence transduction by jointly predicting tokens and durations [arXiv:2304.06795](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.06795)
82. Canary-1B-v2 \& Parakeet-TDT-0.6 B-v3: Efficient and High-Performance Models for Multilingual ASR and AST [arXiv:2509.14128](https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.14128)
83. Layer-wise analysis of a self-supervised speech representation model
84. Relations between two sets of variates
85. DM-Codec: Distilling Multimodal Representations for Speech Tokenization
86. Bigcodec: Pushing the limits of low-bitrate neural speech codec [arXiv:2409.05377](https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.05377)
