---
arxiv_id: '2507.11306'
title: 'P.808 Multilingual Speech Enhancement Testing: Approach and Results of URGENT
  2025 Challenge'
authors:
- Marvin Sach
- Yihui Fu
- Kohei Saijo
- Wangyou Zhang
- Samuele Cornell
- Robin Scheibler
- Chenda Li
- Anurag Kumar
- Wei Wang
- Yanmin Qian
- Shinji Watanabe
- Tim Fingscheidt
submitted: '2025-07-15'
categories:
- eess.AS
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.11306
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 1/49
citations_resolved_at: '2026-07-07T15:58:37+00:00'
references_parsed: 49
arxiv_version: ''
---



## References

1. J.~Richter, S.~Welker, J.-M. Lemercier, B.~Lay, and T.~Gerkmann, ``{Speech Enhancement and Dereverberation With Diffusion-Based Generative Models},'' \emph{IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing}, vol.~31, pp. 2351--2364, 2023.
2. G.~Close, T.~Hain, and S.~Goetze, ``{Hallucination in Perceptual Metric-Driven Speech Enhancement Networks},'' in \emph{Proc.\ of EUSIPCO}, Lyon, France, Aug. 2024, pp. 21--25.
3. J.~Pirklbauer, M.~Sach, K.~Fluyt, W.~Tirry, W.~Wardah, S.~Möller, and T.~Fingscheidt, ``{Evaluation Metrics for Generative Speech Enhancement Methods: Issues and Perspectives},'' in \emph{Proc. of 15th ITG Conference on Speech Communication}, Aachen, Germany, Sep 2023, pp. 265--269.
4. D.~de~Oliveira, J.~Richter, J.-M. Lemercier, T.~Peer, and T.~Gerkmann, ``{On the Behavior of Intrusive and Non-Intrusive Speech Enhancement Metrics in Predictive and Generative Settings},'' in \emph{Proc. of 15th ITG Conference on Speech Communication}, Aachen, Germany, Sep 2023, pp. 260--264.
5. W.~Zhang, R.~Scheibler, K.~Saijo, S.~Cornell, C.~Li, Z.~Ni, J.~Pirklbauer, M.~Sach, S.~Watanabe, T.~Fingscheidt, and Y.~Qian, ``{URGENT Challenge: Universality, Robustness, and Generalizability for Speech Enhancement},'' in \emph{Proc.\ of Interspeech}, Kos, Greece, Sep. 2024, pp. 4868--4872.
6. ITU, \emph{{Rec. P.800: Methods for Subjective Determination of Transmission Quality}}, International Telecommunication Union, Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T), Aug. 1996.
7. B.~Naderi and R.~Cutler, ``{An Open Source Implementation of ITU-T Recommendation P.808 with Validation},'' in \emph{Proc. of Interspeech}, Shanghai, China, Oct. 2020, pp. 2862--2866.
8. ITU, \emph{{Rec. P.808: Subjective Evaluation of Speech Quality with a Crowdsourcing Approach}}, International Telecommunication Union, Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T), Jun. 2001.
9. B.~Naderi and R.~Cutler, ``{Subjective Evaluation of Noise Suppression Algorithms in Crowdsourcing},'' in \emph{{Proc.\ of Interspeech}}, Brno, Czech Republic, Aug. 2021, pp. 2132--2136.
10. Anonymous, ``{Interspeech 2025 URGENT Speech Enhancement Challenge},'' submitted to Interspeech, 2025.
11. F.-L. Wang, H.-S. Lee, Y.~Tsao, and H.-M. Wang, ``{Disentangling the Impacts of Language and Channel Variability on Speech Separation Networks},'' in \emph{Proc. of Interspeech}, Incheon, Korea, Sep. 2022, pp. 5343--5347.
12. L.~Lechler and K.~Wojcicki, ``{Crowdsourced Multilingual Speech Intelligibility Testing},'' in \emph{Proc.\ of ICASSP}, Seoul, Korea, Apr. 2024, pp. 1441--1445.
13. J.~Abel, M.~Kaniewska, C.~Guillaume, W.~Tirry, H.~Pulakka, V.~Myllylä, J.~Sjöberg, P.~Alku, I.~Katsir, D.~Malah, I.~Cohen, M.~A. Tugtekin~Turan, E.~Erzin, T.~Schlien, P.~Vary, A.~Nour-Eldin, P.~Kabal, and T.~Fingscheidt, ``{A Subjective Listening Test of Six Different Artificial Bandwidth Extension Approaches in English, Chinese, German, and Korean},'' in \emph{Proc.\ of ICASSP}, Shanghai, China, Mar. 2016, pp. 5915--5919.
14. W.~Wardah, T.~M.~K. B{\"{u}}y{\"{u}}ktas, K.~Shchegelskiy, S.~M{\"{o}}ller, and R.~P. Spang, ``Language barriers: Evaluating cross-lingual performance of {CNN} and transformer architectures for speech quality estimation,'' in \emph{Proc.\ of ISCA/ITG Workshop on Diversity in Large Speech and Language Models}, Berlin, Germany, Feb. 2025.
15. N.~Pia, K.~Gupta, S.~Korse, M.~Multrus, and G.~Fuchs, ``{NESC: Robust Neural End-2-End Speech Coding with GANs},'' in \emph{Proc.\ of Interspeech}, Incheon, Korea, Sep. 2022, pp. 4212--4216.
16. H.-W. Yoon, J.-S. Kim, R.~Yamamoto, R.~Terashima, C.-H. Song, J.-M. Kim, and E.~Song, ``{Enhancing Multilingual TTS with Voice Conversion Based Data Augmentation and Posterior Embedding},'' in \emph{Proc.\ of ICASSP}, Seoul, Korea, Apr. 2024, pp. 12\,186--12\,190.
17. ITU, \emph{{Rec. P.807: Subjective Test Methodology for Assessing Speech Intelligibility}}, International Telecommunication Union, Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T), Feb. 2016.
18. \BIBentryALTinterwordspacing
``{Amazon Mechanical Turk},'' 2005, accessed: 2025-04-04. [Online]. Available: \url{https://www.mturk.com/}
\BIBentrySTDinterwordspacing
19. B.~Naderi and S.~Möller, ``{Application of Just-Noticeable Difference in Quality as Environment Suitability Test for Crowdsourcing Speech Quality Assessment Task},'' in \emph{Proc. of QoMEX}, Athlone, Ireland, May 2020, pp. 1--6.
20. \BIBentryALTinterwordspacing
``{Amazon Polly},'' 2016, accessed: 2025-04-04. [Online]. Available: \url{https://aws.amazon.com/polly/}
\BIBentrySTDinterwordspacing
21. H.~Dubey, A.~Aazami, V.~Gopal, B.~Naderi, S.~Braun, R.~Cutler, A.~Ju, M.~Zohourian, M.~Tang, M.~Golestaneh, and R.~Aichner, ``{ICASSP 2023 Deep Noise Suppression Challenge},'' \emph{IEEE Open Journal of Signal Processing}, vol.~5, pp. 725--737, 2024.
22. H.~Zen, V.~Dang, R.~Clark, Y.~Zhang, R.~J. Weiss, Y.~Jia, Z.~Chen, and Y.~Wu, ``{LibriTTS: A Corpus Derived from LibriSpeech for Text-to-Speech},'' in \emph{Proc. of Interspeech}, Graz, Austria, Sep. 2019, pp. 1526--1530.
23. C.~Veaux, J.~Yamagishi, and S.~King, ``{The Voice Bank Corpus: Design, Collection and Data Analysis of a Large Regional Accent Speech Database},'' in \emph{Proc. of O-COCOSDA/CASLRE}, Gurgaon, India, Nov. 2013, pp. 1--4.
24. J.~Garofolo, D.~Graff, D.~Paul, and D.~Pallett, ``{CSR-I} ({WSJ0}) {C}omplete,'' \emph{Linguistic Data Consortium, Philadelphia}, 2007.
25. J.~Richter, Y.-C. Wu, S.~Krenn, S.~Welker, B.~Lay, S.~Watanabe, A.~Richard, and T.~Gerkmann, ``{EARS: An Anechoic Fullband Speech Dataset Benchmarked for Speech Enhancement and Dereverberation},'' in \emph{Proc. of Interspeech}, Kos, Greece, Sep. 2024, pp. 4873--4877.
26. V.~Pratap, Q.~Xu, A.~Sriram, G.~Synnaeve, and R.~Collobert, ``{MLS: A Large-Scale Multilingual Dataset for Speech Research},'' in \emph{Proc. of Interspeech}, Shanghai, China, Oct. 2020, pp. 2757--2761.
27. R.~Ardila, M.~Branson, K.~Davis, M.~Kohler, J.~Meyer, M.~Henretty, R.~Morais, L.~Saunders, F.~Tyers, and G.~Weber, ``{Common Voice: A Massively-Multilingual Speech Corpus},'' in \emph{Proc. of LREC}, Marseille, France, May 2020, pp. 4218--4222.
28. I.~Demirsahin, O.~Kjartansson, A.~Gutkin, and C.~Rivera, ``{Open-Source Multi-Speaker Corpora of the English Accents in the British Isles},'' in \emph{Proc.\ of LREC}, Marseille, France, May 2020, pp. 6532--6541.
29. A.~Guevara-Rukoz, I.~Demirsahin, F.~He, S.-H.~C. Chu, S.~Sarin, K.~Pipatsrisawat, A.~Gutkin, A.~Butryna, and O.~Kjartansson, ``{Crowdsourcing Latin American Spanish for Low-Resource Text-to-Speech},'' in \emph{Proc.\ of LREC}, Marseille, France, May 2020, pp. 6504--6513.
30. J.~Hauret, M.~Olivier, T.~Joubaud, C.~Langrenne, S.~Poirée, V.~Zimpfer, and Éric Bavu, ``{Vibravox: A Dataset of French Speech Captured with Body-Conduction Audio Sensors},'' \emph{arXiv:2407.11828}, Mar. 2025. [arXiv:2407.11828](https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.11828)
31. A.~Köhn, F.~Stegen, and T.~Baumann, ``{Mining the Spoken Wikipedia for Speech Data and Beyond},'' in \emph{Proc.\ of LREC}, Portorož, Slovenia, May 2016, pp. 4644--4647.
32. Y.~Shi, H.~Bu, X.~Xu, S.~Zhang, and M.~Li, ``{AISHELL-3: A Multi-Speaker Mandarin TTS Corpus},'' in \emph{Proc.\ of Interspeech}, Brno, Czechia, Aug. 2021, pp. 2756--2760.
33. T.~Okamoto, Y.~Shiga, and H.~Kawai, ``{Hi-Fi-CAPTAIN: High-Fidelity and High-Capacity Conversational Speech Synthesis Corpus Developed by NICT},'' https://ast-astrec.nict.go.jp/en/release/hi-fi-captain/, 2023.
34. D.~Xin, J.~Jiang, S.~Takamichi, Y.~Saito, A.~Aizawa, and H.~Saruwatari, ``{JVNV: A Corpus of Japanese Emotional Speech With Verbal Content and Nonverbal Expressions},'' \emph{IEEE Access}, vol.~12, pp. 19\,752--19\,764, 2024.
35. S.~Watanabe, M.~Mandel, J.~Barker, E.~Vincent, A.~Arora, X.~Chang, S.~Khudanpur, V.~Manohar, D.~Povey, D.~Raj \emph{et~al.}, ``{CHiME-6 Challenge: Tackling Multispeaker Speech Recognition for Unsegmented Recordings},'' in \emph{Proc.\ of CHiME Workshop}, virtual, May 2020.
36. A.~Triantafyllopoulos, A.~Semertzidou, M.~Song, F.~B. Pokorny, and B.~W. Schuller, ``{Introducing the COVID-19 YouTube (COVYT) Speech Dataset Featuring the Same Speakers with and Without Infection},'' \emph{Biomedical Signal Processing and Control}, vol.~88, p. 105642, 2024.
37. A.~Conneau, M.~Ma, S.~Khanuja, Y.~Zhang, V.~Axelrod, S.~Dalmia, J.~Riesa, C.~Rivera, and A.~Bapna, ``{FLEURS: FEW-Shot Learning Evaluation of Universal Representations of Speech},'' in \emph{Proc.\ of SLT}, Doha, Qatar, Jan. 2023, pp. 798--805.
38. N.~Bertin, E.~Camberlein, R.~Lebarbenchon, E.~Vincent, S.~Sivasankaran, I.~Illina, and F.~Bimbot, ``{VoiceHome-2, an Extended Corpus for Multichannel Speech Processing in Real Homes},'' \emph{Speech Communication}, vol. 106, pp. 68--78, 2019.
39. Y.~Fu, L.~Cheng, S.~Lv, Y.~Jv, Y.~Kong, Z.~Chen, Y.~Hu, L.~Xie, J.~Wu, H.~Bu, X.~Xu, J.~Du, and J.~Chen, ``{AISHELL-4: An Open Source Dataset for Speech Enhancement, Separation, Recognition and Speaker Diarization in Conference Scenario},'' in \emph{Proc.\ of Interspeech}, Brno, Czechia, Aug. 2021.
40. X.~Li, S.~Takamichi, T.~Saeki, W.~Chen, S.~Shiota, and S.~Watanabe, ``{Yodas: Youtube-Oriented Dataset for Audio and Speech},'' in \emph{Proc. of ASRU}, Taipei, Taiwan, Dec. 2023.
41. N.~C. Ristea, A.~Saabas, R.~Cutler, B.~Naderi, S.~Braun, and S.~Branets, ``{ICASSP 2024 Speech Signal Improvement Challenge},'' in \emph{ICASSP}, Seoul, Korea, Apr. 2024.
42. ITU, \emph{{Rec. P.862: Perceptual Evaluation of Speech Quality (PESQ)}}, International Telecommunication Union, Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T), Feb. 2001.
43. C.~K.~A. Reddy, V.~Gopal, and R.~Cutler, ``{DNSMOS: {A} Non-Intrusive Perceptual Objective Speech Quality Metric to Evaluate Noise Suppressors},'' in \emph{Proc. of ICASSP}, Toronto, ON, Canada, Jun. 2021, pp. 6493--6497.
44. G.~Mittag, B.~Naderi, A.~Chehadi, and S.~Möller, ``{NISQA: A Deep CNN-Self-Attention Model for Multidimensional Speech Quality Prediction with Crowdsourced Datasets},'' in \emph{{Proc. of Interspeech}}, Brno, Czech Republic, Aug. 2021, pp. 2127--2131.
45. J.~Jensen and C.~H. Taal, ``{An Algorithm for Predicting the Intelligibility of Speech Masked by Modulated Noise Maskers},'' \emph{IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing}, vol.~24, no.~11, pp. 2009--2022, 2016.
46. \BIBentryALTinterwordspacing
``{URGENT 2025 Speech Enhancement Challenge Scoreboard},'' 2025, accessed: 2025-04-04. [Online]. Available: \url{https://urgent-challenge.com/competitions/13#final_results}
\BIBentrySTDinterwordspacing
47. K.~H. Arehart, S.~H. Chon, E.~M.~H. Lundberg, L.~O.~H. Jr., J.~M. Kates, M.~C. Anderson, V.~H. Rallapalli, and P.~E. Souza, ``{A Comparison of Speech Intelligibility and Subjective Quality with Hearing-Aid Processing in Older Adults with Hearing Loss},'' \emph{International Journal of Audiology}, vol.~61, no.~1, pp. 46--58, 2022.
48. F.~Schiffner, J.~Skowronek, and A.~Raake, ``{On the Impact of Speech Intelligibility on Speech Quality in the Context of Voice over IP Telephony},'' in \emph{Proc.\ of QoMEX}, Singapore, Singapore, Sep. 2014, pp. 59--60.
49. H.-T. Chiang, K.-H. Hung, S.-W. Fu, H.-C. Kuo, M.-H. Tsai, and Y.~Tsao, ``{Study on the Correlation Between Objective Evaluations and Subjective Speech Quality and Intelligibility},'' in \emph{Proc.\ of ASRU}, Taipei, Taiwan, Dec. 2023, pp. 1--7.
