---
arxiv_id: "2511.05143"
title:
  Synthesizing speech with selected perceptual voice qualities - A case study
  with creaky voice
authors:
  - Frederik Rautenberg
  - Fritz Seebauer
  - Jana Wiechmann
  - Michael Kuhlmann
  - Petra Wagner
  - Reinhold Haeb-Umbach
submitted: "2025-11-07"
categories:
  - eess.AS
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.05143
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 10/43
citations_resolved_at: "2026-07-07T15:53:04+00:00"
references_parsed: 43
arxiv_version: ""
---

# Introduction

In the last few years, the quality of speech synthesis and voice conversion systems has reached a level of naturalness that is essentially on par with human speech . Recent works that integrate prosody or emotional control even allow for the generation of specific speaking styles, such as spontaneous speech and personalized voices . In the study presented here, we focus on synthesizing speech with selected <span acronym-label="pvq" acronym-form="plural+short">pvqs</span>, where _creak_ serves as a prototypical example. The modification of such specific voice characteristics and attributes has so far attracted comparatively low attention .

Our motivation for this work is to support expert phoneticians in training students on the perceptual and acoustic-phonetic properties of <span acronym-label="pvq" acronym-form="plural+short">pvqs</span>. We aim to design a TTS system that can generate speech probes with predefined <span acronym-label="pvq" acronym-form="plural+short">pvqs</span>, where the perceived speaker identity should not change when manipulating them. Further, we wish to have zero-shot capability, allowing us to modify the voice of a speaker not seen in training. We have chosen _creak_ for our study, because, unlike the <span acronym-label="pvq" acronym-form="plural+short">pvqs</span> investigated in , it is typically non-persistent and often occurs locally within an utterance, e.g., utterance finally. Also, we can compare our results with existing prior research.

_Creaky voice_ is characterized by a low rate of vocal fold vibration, combined with a constricted glottis, resulting in a low and irregular pitch, . While the aforementioned pattern is defined as the prototypical form of _creaky_ voice, there also exist atypical variations of creak, with their distinct acoustic properties , making _creak_ hard to grasp analytically. However, as _creak_ fulfills many communicative and sociolinguistic functions, its analysis is vital within speech science, but has so far received only little attention in the field of speech synthesis or voice editing. The authors of modified a <span acronym-label="tts" acronym-form="singular+short">tts</span> system to control the presence of _creak_ in the speech signal. They introduced a conditioning mechanism based on word-level _creak_ percentages, allowing for manipulation of _creak_. Their study examined two different types of _creak_ placement and analyzed its impact on social perception and turn-taking processes. In , the code from was adapted by replacing prosodic acoustic features with word-level _creak_ probabilities. They defined three distinct types of _creak_: no-creak, stylistic creak, and end-of-phrase creak. Experimental results demonstrated that, given the conditioning, the model successfully synthesized speech that aligned with the specified _creak_ characteristics. In these works , the <span acronym-label="tts" acronym-form="singular+short">tts</span> system was trained in a speaker-dependent manner.

In their most recent study , a pre-trained voice conversion system in combination with a pre-trained WavLM model was employed. The system was adapted and fine-tuned to enable _creak_ modification in synthesized speech. Their approach utilizes frame-wise _creak_ probabilities as an additional conditioning factor. These probabilities are extracted using CreaPy , a tool that analyzes acoustic features and employs a classifier to predict frame-wise _creak_ probabilities. By adjusting the conditioning, the level of _creak_ in specific regions of the speech can be controlled. However, the effectiveness of this method relies on accurate frame-wise _creak_ probability estimations, which are notoriously hard to obtain. Experiments in showed that global _creak_ probability estimations demonstrate a significantly higher agreement with human annotations than frame-wise estimations, which motivates a manipulation technique that requires only global _creak_ probabilities. Recent works have demonstrated the effectiveness of global speaker attribute modification in adjusting both speaker characteristics and <span acronym-label="pvq" acronym-form="plural+short">pvqs</span>. These studies applied normalizing flows , allowing continuous control over global speaker attributes.

The study presented here aims to investigate whether such global speaker attribute modification is appropriate for modifying non-persistent attributes like _creak_, thus eliminating necessity of local _creak_ prediction. Our investigations show that our model, which is based on , successfully places _creak_ modifications mainly in voiced segments by analyzing their influence on the <span acronym-label="tts" acronym-form="singular+short">tts</span> embedding representations. Indeed, as a phonation type, _creaky voice_ depends on the activity of the vocal folds and is therefore limited to voiced signal parts ,

While different types of _creak_ exist, we here focus on manipulating the prototypical form and for now do not take into account its conversational functions. This is in part caused by the fact that we use a corpus of read speech, LibriTTS-R , for training our system, which does not contain spontaneous speech or dialogues. We opted for this data set, because it is sufficiently large to allow synthesizing and manipulating the speech of speakers not seen in training, an important property for the application we are targeting.

We demonstrate that adjusting the global _creak_ probability effectively influences the perceived _creakiness_ in synthesized speech [^2]. To validate this, we conduct listening tests with phonetic experts. Given the limited research and open source models in this area, we compare our system to the most recent one , which follows a different approach by relying on local _creak_ probabilities. Our results indicate that global manipulation achieves comparable outcomes to local manipulations, suggesting that a global approach is a possible alternative.

# Controlling voice quality in TTS

We adapted a <span acronym-label="tts" acronym-form="singular+short">tts</span> system to modify _creak_, a voice quality present in certain locations of speech, using a global speaker manipulation mechanism to apply modifications and ensure that the changes are correctly positioned.

## Adapting TTS for speaker control

Our approach is based on YourTTS , an extension of VITS . The model is trained to maximize the <span acronym-label="elbo" acronym-form="singular+short">elbo</span>:

```math
\begin{equation}
    \begin{aligned}
        \mathrm{log}\, p_{\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{X}}}}(\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{x}}} | \ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{c}}}) \geq  \mathbb{E}_{q_{\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{Z}}}}} \left[ \vphantom{\frac{test}{test}} \right.& \mathrm{log}\,p_{\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{X}}}}(\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{x}}} | \ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{z}}}) - \left. \mathrm{log}\frac{q_{\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{Z}}}}(\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{z}}}|\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{x}}})}{p_{\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{Z}}}}(\mathbf{z}|\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{c}}})} \right] \, ,
    \end{aligned}
\end{equation}
```

given the latent embedding $`\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{Z}}} \in \mathcal{R}^{D \times T}`$, the conditioning $`\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{c}}} = \left[ \ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{c}}}_{\mathrm{text}}, \ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{s}}}\right]`$, which is a combination of the text embedding $`\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{c}}}_{\mathrm{text}}`$ and a speaker embedding $`\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{s}}}`$, and the speech signal $`\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{x}}}`$. $`p_{\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{Z}}}}(\mathbf{z}|\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{c}}})`$ is the prior, $`p_{\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{X}}}}(\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{x}}} | \ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{z}}})`$ the likelihood and $`q_{\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{Z}}}}(\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{z}}}|\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{x}}})`$ the posterior distribution. All distributions are approximated by parametrized models. The prior encoder consists of a text encoder followed by a projection layer, which estimates the representation of the text input. An alignment function maps the text representation to the estimated duration of the target speech. Furthermore, the encoder incorporates a normalizing flow that enhances the flexibility of the distribution . This flow consists of a stack of coupling layers and is designed such that the Jacobian determinant remains one, by applying a shift-only operation. A HiFi-GAN is used as the decoder, which synthesizes from the embedding $`\vec{Z}`$ the speech signal $`\hat{\vec{x}}`$. The input of the posterior encoder is the spectrogram of $`\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{x}}}`$, the encoder is designed, such that the time resolution of $`\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{Z}}}`$ matches that of the spectrogram. This encoder is only used during training .

<a href="#fig:tts" data-reference-type="ref+Label" data-reference="fig:tts">1</a> illustrates the system during inference. Compared to YourTTS , we introduced several modifications to enhance control over speaker attributes. First, we removed the conditioning of the decoder on the speaker embedding $`\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{s}}}`$. The motivation behind this change is to constrain the influence of the speaker embedding to a single fixed point in the model, ensuring a better investigation of its influence. Second, we replaced the original speaker encoder with a d-vector model . Lastly, we included a speaker manipulation block, allowing for controlled modification of speaker attributes. It is important to note that the duration predictor remains constrained by the unmanipulated speaker embedding. This ensures that the speaking rate is unaffected by the manipulation.

<figure id="fig:tts" data-latex-placement="!b">

<figcaption><span data-acronym-label="tts" data-acronym-form="singular+short">tts</span> inference with a speaker embedding manipulation block, where <span class="math inline"><em>a</em></span> is the creak probability of <span class="math inline"><strong>x</strong></span> and <span class="math inline"><em>a</em> + <em>ã</em></span> its modified probability. The switch controls whether the original or the modified speaker embedding is used.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Modifying speaker representations

The authors of applied the concept of <span acronym-label="ccnf" acronym-form="singular+short">ccnf</span> to achieve a global speaker attribute manipulation. This concept was followed in to manipulate a global perceptual voice quality. We use this idea to manipulate a positional <span acronym-label="pvq" acronym-form="singular+short">pvq</span>, i.e., a quality that is not persistent. Our approach consists of a global speaker manipulation, but we assume and later investigate, that the manipulation is done on the correct location in the speech signal. We also use the concept of <span acronym-label="ccnf" acronym-form="singular+short">ccnf</span> to apply a global speaker manipulation. The goal of the <span acronym-label="ccnf" acronym-form="singular+short">ccnf</span> is to learn a transformation of the random variable such that the speaker embedding becomes normally distributed after applying it. This transformation function is learned from the data $`\mathcal{S} = \left\{\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{s}}}_n\right\}_{n=1}^N`$ by maximizing the following log-likelihood function

```math
\begin{align}
    &l = \sum_n \mathrm{log}p_{\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{S}}}} \left( \ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{s}}}_n | \ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{a}}}_n \right) \nonumber \\
    &= \sum_n \mathrm{log}p_{\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{Z}}}_0}\left( \ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{z}}}_n(t_0)\right) + \int_{t_1}^{t_0}\mathrm{tr}\left( \frac{\mathrm{d} f(\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{z}}}(t), t, \ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{a}}}_n)}{\mathrm{d}\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{z}}}(t)} \right) \mathrm{d}t
    \label{eq:likelihood_2}
\end{align}
```

with

```math
\begin{align}
    \label{eq:transformation}
    \ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{z}}}_n(t_0) = \ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{z}}}_n(t_1) + \int_{t_1}^{t_0}  f(\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{z}}}(t), t, \ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{a}}}) \mathrm{d}t  \, .
\end{align}
```

With $`\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{z}}}_n(t_0) \sim \mathcal{N}(\mathbf{0}, \mathbf{I})`$, the parametrized function $`f(\cdot)`$ and the initial condition is given by $`\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{s}}} = \ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{z}}}_n(t_1)`$. Note, we assumed that the speaker embedding is indirectly conditioned by the speaker attribute, thus no additional input for the speaker encoder is needed. Computing the log-likelihood requires solving two <span acronym-label="ode" acronym-form="singular+short">ode</span> problems, <a href="#eq:likelihood_2" data-reference-type="ref+Label" data-reference="eq:likelihood_2">[eq:likelihood_2]</a> and <a href="#eq:transformation" data-reference-type="ref+Label" data-reference="eq:transformation">[eq:transformation]</a>.

<figure id="fig:diff_dist" data-latex-placement="!htb">

<figcaption>Distribution of differences <span class="math inline"><em>Δ</em><sub><em>t</em>, <em>ã</em>, <em>c</em></sub></span> across voiced and unvoiced classes for seen and unseen speakers. The plot combines positive and negative manipulations, with mean values highlighted to indicate overall trends.</figcaption>
</figure>

After training, the speaker embedding $`\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{s}}}`$ is manipulated in the following steps. First, the speaker embedding $`\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{s}}}`$ and its attribute vector $`a`$ are extracted from the speech signal $`\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{x}}}`$. Next, the speaker embedding is transformed into $`\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{z}}}(t_0)`$ by solving the <span acronym-label="ode" acronym-form="singular+short">ode</span> problem <a href="#eq:transformation" data-reference-type="ref+Label" data-reference="eq:transformation">[eq:transformation]</a> with the initial condition $`\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{s}}} = \ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{z}}}(t_1)`$. Finally, the inverse of <a href="#eq:transformation" data-reference-type="ref+Label" data-reference="eq:transformation">[eq:transformation]</a> is applied, which is again an <span acronym-label="ode" acronym-form="singular+short">ode</span> problem. This time, the initial condition is set to the obtained vector $`\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{z}}}(t_0)`$, but the attribute is modified to $`a + \tilde{a}`$, resulting in the manipulated speaker embedding $`\tilde{\vec{s}}`$. Together, these steps form the manipulation block, which enables controlled modification of speaker attributes.

<div id="tab:diff_z">

<table>
<caption>Mean and standard deviation of <span class="math inline"><em>Δ</em><sub><em>t</em>, <em>ã</em>, <em>c</em></sub> ⋅ 10<sup>2</sup></span> in voiced and unvoiced segments for different modification strengths with combined positive and negative manipulations</caption>
<thead>
<tr>
<th style="text-align: center;">Set</th>
<th style="text-align: center;">Group</th>
<th colspan="4" style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">|<em>ã</em>|</span></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span>3-6</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.25</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.5</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.75</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2" style="text-align: center;">seen</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">voiced</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 5</span></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">14 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 11</span></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">20 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 14</span></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">23 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 15</span></span></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">unvoiced</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 2</span></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 4</span></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 6</span></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">8 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 6</span></span></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2" style="text-align: center;">unseen</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">voiced</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 4</span></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">12 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 10</span></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">19 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 14</span></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">22 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 15</span></span></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">unvoiced</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 1</span></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 3</span></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 5</span></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">7 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 6</span></span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

# Experiments

The experiments were conducted on the LibriTTS-R dataset , which applies sound quality improvements to the original LibriTTS dataset . LibriTTS-R comprises 585 hours of speech data from 2,456 speakers. The training of the <span acronym-label="tts" acronym-form="singular+short">tts</span> system followed the train-test split proposed in .

The manipulation block, consisting of a <span acronym-label="ccnf" acronym-form="singular+short">ccnf</span>, was trained independently of the <span acronym-label="tts" acronym-form="singular+short">tts</span> system using speaker embeddings $`\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{s}}}`$ and their corresponding attribute $`a`$. The same train-test split as in the <span acronym-label="tts" acronym-form="singular+short">tts</span> system was used. Speaker conditioning denoted as $`a`$, represents the global _creak_ probability, which was extracted using CreaPy . We followed the extraction process described in but incorporated an additional energy-based voice activity detection to preprocess the speech signal $`\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{x}}}`$. This additional step was necessary to reduce the influence of noise in silent segments on the estimation. A frame-wise estimation of the _creak_ probability was then performed, with the final global estimation obtained by averaging the frame-wise results. The training objective was the likelihood, as explained in <a href="#eq:likelihood_2" data-reference-type="ref+Label" data-reference="eq:likelihood_2">[eq:likelihood*2]</a>. Optimizing this function required solving two <span acronym-label="ode" acronym-form="singular+short">ode</span> problems, for which we employed the solver from . The trace estimation was performed using Hutchinson’s trace estimator . The function $`f(\cdot)`$ was modeled using a single CCNF block with a hidden size of 512. The \_creak* modification of the speech signal $`\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{x}}}`$ was performed in the following steps: first, the speaker embedding $`\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{s}}}`$ and its estimated attribute $`a`$ were extracted. Next, the manipulated speaker embedding $`\tilde{\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{s}}}}`$ with the desired _creak_ probability was obtained by applying the manipulation block to $`\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{s}}}`$. $`\tilde{\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{s}}}}`$ was then used as input for the <span acronym-label="tts" acronym-form="singular+short">tts</span> system. The desired _creak_ measure was computed as the original estimated $`a`$ plus a manipulation factor $`\tilde{a}`$.

## Temporal analysis of creak manipulation

Here, we are going to investigate whether the global speaker attribute manipulation is appropriate for manipulating the speech signal at the appropriate positions. _Creak_ occurs only in voiced segments of speech . To check, whether predominantly voiced segments are affected by the speaker attribute manipulation, we first extracted the text transcription of the unmanipulated speech signal $`\hat{\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{x}}}}`$ using Whisper . Then, we obtained phoneme annotations and their corresponding durations using the Montreal Forced Aligner , employing a dictionary that extracts phonemes based on IPA charts. According to the IPA chart, phonetic experts categorized the phonemes into three groups: voiced, unvoiced, and silence, resulting in 42 voiced and 13 unvoiced phonemes.

To determine which phonemes are most affected by _creak_ manipulation, we mapped the phonemes and their categories onto the time resolution of $`\mathbf{Z} = \begin{bmatrix} \ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{z}}}_1 & \dots & \ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{z}}}_T
\end{bmatrix}`$ resulting in $`\mathbf{Z}_c = \begin{bmatrix}
\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{z}}}_{1,c} & \dots & \ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{z}}}_{T,c}
\end{bmatrix}`$ where $`c`$ represents one of the three phoneme categories. The decoder is designed such that the synthesized spectrogram $`\tilde{\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{X}}}}`$ maintains the same temporal resolution as the latent embedding $`\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{Z}}}`$, using identical parameters as the posterior encoder during training. The same steps were applied to the manipulated speech signal $`\tilde{\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{x}}}}`$. Using the <span acronym-label="mae" acronym-form="singular+short">mae</span> metric, we calculated the difference between unmanipulated and manipulated embeddings

```math
\begin{align}
    \Delta_{t, \tilde{a}} = \frac{1}{D} \left\lVert\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{z}}}_{t,a} - \ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{z}}}_{t,\tilde{a}} \right\rVert_1
\end{align}
```

with $`\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{z}}}_{t,a}`$ the unmanipulated and $`\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{z}}}_{t,\tilde{a}}`$ the manipulated embedding. Using the class label $`c`$ we categorized each difference to one of the three classes $`\Delta_{t,\tilde{a},c}`$. Note, we investigated the difference in the embedding space rather than in the synthesized voice, to ignore the effects of the decoder.

<div class="table*">

<div class="center">

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th style="text-align: center;">Method</th>
<th style="text-align: center;">Set</th>
<th style="text-align: center;"></th>
<th colspan="3" style="text-align: center;">Creak Manipulation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span>4-6</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Suppressed</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Unmanipulated</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Amplified</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2" style="text-align: center;">Proposed</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Perc. Creak (0-100)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">44.08 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 26.93</span></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">25.38 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 18.34</span></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">39.12 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 24.19</span></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">74.19 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 16.93</span></span></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">MOS <span class="math inline">↑</span> (1-5)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.23 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 0.97</span></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.54 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 1.13</span></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.79 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 1.24</span></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.75 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 1.25</span></span></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2" style="text-align: center;">CreakVC <span class="citation" data-cites="lameris2024creakvc"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Perc. Creak (0-100)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">39.35 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 24.81</span></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">25.23 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 18.61</span></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">42.23 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 24.22</span></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">85.25 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 12.48</span></span></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">MOS <span class="math inline">↑</span> (1-5)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.81 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 0.96</span></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.08 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 1.16</span></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.73 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 1.05</span></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.33 <span><span style="color: gray"><span class="math inline">±</span> 1.12</span></span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="tab:results_perceived_pvq" label="tab:results_perceived_pvq"></span>

</div>

</div>

From 300 randomly selected utterances, both manipulated and unmanipulated embeddings were extracted, and the <span acronym-label="mae" acronym-form="singular+short">mae</span> was computed. <a href="#fig:diff_dist" data-reference-type="ref+Label" data-reference="fig:diff_dist">2</a> visualizes the difference $`\Delta_{t, \tilde{a}, c}`$ as a function of the manipulation degree for utterances from the training and test set, while <a href="#tab:diff_z" data-reference-type="ref+Label" data-reference="tab:diff_z">1</a> presents the mean and standard deviation. As the manipulation factor increases, the magnitude of changes in the embeddings also grows, with distinct variations across phoneme categories. Voiced segments display much more noticeable differences than unvoiced segments, with both the mean difference and standard deviation increasing as the manipulation factor increases. While this does not prove that the manipulation corresponds to emphasizing or deemphasizing _creak_, it indicates that the model’s response to manipulation is particularly strong at the correct position, i.e., for voiced segments.

<div id="tab:correlation_coef">

|  Set   | Creak | Pitch |  HNR  | H1-H2 |
| :----: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
|  seen  | 0.81  | -0.80 | -0.90 | -0.59 |
| unseen | 0.82  | -0.78 | -0.91 | -0.67 |

Pearson correlation coefficient $`R`$ between acoustic features extracted from $`\tilde{\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{x}}}}`$ and $`\tilde{a}`$ for seen and unseen speakers

</div>

## Subjective listening tests

We conducted a subjective listening test to evaluate the perceptual impact of _creak_ manipulation. We compared our system with CreakVC , which employs local _creak_ probabilities. Although both methods were fine-tuned on VCTK , our system showed reduced performance on that dataset. Therefore, we used speakers from LibriTTS-R for our proposed method and VCTK speakers for CreakVC.

As _creak_ is not a commonly known concept, we recruited 12 speech experts as participants. Given the time-intensive nature of the evaluation, each participant was presented with a randomized section of manipulated speech samples at three different modification levels: Suppressed, unmanipulated and amplified, corresponding to $`\tilde{a} \in \left\{-1, 0, 1 \right\}`$ for the proposed method and the mean average creak values $`\tilde{a} \in \left\{-10, 0, 10 \right\}`$ for CreakVC. These values were chosen to yield a similar degree of _creak_ in the synthesis measured with Creapy. For each manipulation, a speaker from the train set of each model is used. We made this choice, because CreakVC used nearly all speakers except one from the VCTK set for training. Each participant rated 16 samples from each system, resulting in 384 ratings in total, with an average audio duration of $`5.48\,\mathrm{s}`$ and covering 65 ($`31\,`$f, $`34\,`$m) unique speakers. Each speaker’s original recording served as a reference, and presentation order of each trial was randomized.

The evaluation criteria comprised the perceived _creak_ and the <span acronym-label="mos" acronym-form="singular+short">mos</span> for perceived audio quality, assessed using the standard ITU-T scale (1 = Bad to 5 = Excellent). For _creak_, we employed a 100-point open-ended interval scale (25 = no creak, 75 = very strong creak), following the recommendations in and .

<a href="#tab:results_perceived_pvq" data-reference-type="ref+Label" data-reference="tab:results_perceived_pvq">[tab:results*perceived_pvq]</a> presents the mean and standard deviation of the subjective ratings. Expert listeners clearly rated the amplified condition with higher creak levels and the suppressed condition with lower levels for both systems. Bonferonni corrected Wilcoxon rank sum tests confirmed that the differences in creak ratings were statistically significant $`p<0.001`$, with the exception of the unmanipulated to suppressed change (significant value at $`p<0.05`$ for the proposed method and $`p<0.005`$ for CreakVC). No significant difference was observed between the unmanipulated synthesis and the natural recording. Regarding the <span acronym-label="mos" acronym-form="singular+short">mos</span> ratings, a slight quality reduction was noted from the original to the synthesized unmanipulated speech, with CreakVC showing lower performance under both manipulation conditions. In summary, these findings indicate that our proposed global manipulation of \_creak* effectively modulates perceived _creak_, achieving results comparable to those of a model that uses local _creak_ probabilities.

## Acoustic measurements

Following , a prototypical creaky voice is characterized by three acoustic properties: low pitch $`f_0`$, irregular pitch (measured by <span acronym-label="hnr" acronym-form="singular+short">hnr</span>), and a constricted glottis (measured by the amplitude difference between the first and second harmonics (H1-H2)). Notably, three of the five features used by to predict _creak_ probability correspond to these properties. In our objective test, we investigate whether our manipulated speech signals $`\tilde{\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{x}}}}`$ differ in these acoustic measures. We synthesized voices with manipulation strengths $`a \in \left\{-1.5, 0, 1.5 \right\}`$ in increments of 0.25, and extracted the mean pitch (following ), <span acronym-label="hnr" acronym-form="singular+short">hnr</span>, and H1-H2 using Praat [^3], and creak probability using Creapy . <a href="#tab:correlation_coef" data-reference-type="ref+Label" data-reference="tab:correlation_coef">2</a> reports the Pearson correlation coefficient $`R`$ between $`\tilde{a}`$ and the corresponding acoustic features extracted from $`\tilde{\ensuremath{\boldsymbol{\mathbf{x}}}}`$. A high positive correlation is observed between $`\tilde{a}`$ and mean _creak_ probability, while negative correlations are found for the other features, consistent with . Although the correlations for pitch and <span acronym-label="hnr" acronym-form="singular+short">hnr</span> are strong, the correlation for H1-H2 is less pronounced.

# Conclusions

We could show that the system for global speaker attribute manipulation is able to manipulate the strength of _creak_, although this voice quality is non-persistent and only locally present. Since the system does not employ any particular properties of _creak_, we are confident that it can be used for the manipulation of a wide range of perceptual voice qualities with no or little adjustment.

# Acknowledgements

Funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation): TRR 318/1 2021- 438445824 and 446378607. Acknowledgements hidden during review.

[^1]: Code available at <https://github.com/fgnt/pvq_manipulation>

[^2]: Audio examples: [https://go.upb.de/Interspeech_creak_demo](https://groups.uni-paderborn.de/nt/interspeech_2025_creak_demo/interspeech_creak_demo.html)

[^3]: www.praat.org

## References

1. CreakVC: A Voice Conversion Tool for Modulating Creaky Voice
2. Freevc: Towards high-quality text-free one-shot voice conversion
3. Creapy: A python-based tool for the detection of creak in conversational speech
4. The Role of Creaky Voice in Turn Taking and the Perception of Speaker Stance: Experiments Using Controllable TTS
5. Creaky voice as a phonational device marking parenthetical segments in talk
6. Acoustic properties of different kinds of creaky voice.
7. Opensmile: the munich versatile and fast open-source audio feature extractor
8. GTR-Voice: Articulatory Phonetics Informed Controllable Expressive Speech Synthesis
9. Permod: Perceptually grounded voice modification with latent diffusion models
10. The phonetic description of voice quality
11. Wavlm: Large-scale self-supervised pre-training for full stack speech processing
12. Montreal Forced Aligner: Trainable Text-Speech Alignment Using Kaldi [doi:10.21437/Interspeech.2017-1386](https://doi.org/10.21437/Interspeech.2017-1386)
13. English (UK) MFA dictionary v3.0.0
14. LibriTTS-R: A Restored Multi-Speaker Text-to-Speech Corpus [doi:10.21437/Interspeech.2023-1584](https://doi.org/10.21437/Interspeech.2023-1584)
15. LibriTTS: A Corpus Derived from LibriSpeech for Text-to-Speech [doi:10.21437/Interspeech.2019-2441](https://doi.org/10.21437/Interspeech.2019-2441)
16. Cross-domain neural pitch and periodicity estimation [arXiv:2301.12258](https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.12258)
17. Praat: doing phonetics by computer [Computer program]
18. Speech Synthesis along Perceptual Voice Quality Dimensions [arXiv:2501.08791](./2501.08791.md)
19. YourTTS: Towards Zero-Shot Multi-Speaker TTS and Zero-Shot Voice Conversion for Everyone
20. Conditional Variational Autoencoder with Adversarial Learning for End-to-End Text-to-Speech
21. StyleFlow: Attribute-conditioned Exploration of StyleGAN-Generated Images using Conditional Continuous Normalizing Flows
22. HiFi-GAN: Generative adversarial networks for efficient and high fidelity speech synthesis
23. VoiceShop: A Unified Speech-to-Speech Framework for Identity-Preserving Zero-Shot Voice Editing [arXiv:2404.06674](https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.06674)
24. Neural Ordinary Differential Equations
25. Frame-Wise and Overlap-Robust Speaker Embeddings for Meeting Diarization [doi:10.1109/icassp49357.2023.10095370](https://doi.org/10.1109/icassp49357.2023.10095370)
26. FFJORD: Free-Form Continuous Dynamics for Scalable Reversible Generative Models
27. The Role of Creaky Voice in Turn Taking and the Perception of Speaker Stance: Experiments Using Controllable TTS
28. Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision
29. ITU-T Rec. P.808, Subjective evaluation of speech quality with a crowdsourcing approach
30. Voice Conversion Challenge 2020 –- Intra-lingual semi-parallel and cross-lingual voice conversion –- [doi:10.21437/VCCBC.2020-14](https://doi.org/10.21437/VCCBC.2020-14)
31. GTR-Voice: Articulatory Phonetics Informed Controllable Expressive Speech Synthesis [doi:10.21437/Interspeech.2024-2216](https://doi.org/10.21437/Interspeech.2024-2216)
32. The versatility of creaky phonation: Segmental, prosodic, and sociolinguistic uses in the world's languages
33. Creaky Voice in American English: How Are American Women Who Use Creaky Voice Perceived? A Literature Review
34. Prosody-controllable spontaneous TTS with neural HMMs
35. Neural speech synthesis with controllable creaky voice style
36. Variational Inference with Normalizing Flows
37. Constructing Confidence Sets Using Rank Statistics [doi:10.1080/01621459.1972.10481279](https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.1972.10481279)
38. When and why listeners disagree in voice quality assessment tasks
39. An evaluation protocol for the subjective assessment of text-to-speech in audiobook reading tasks
40. CSTR VCTK Corpus: English Multi-speaker Corpus for CSTR Voice Cloning Toolkit (version 0.92)
41. Naturalspeech: End-to-end text-to-speech synthesis with human-level quality
42. Emotion intensity and its control for emotional voice conversion
43. An overview of affective speech synthesis and conversion in the deep learning era
